Testimony of the
Department of Health and Human Services
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and

Human Services

A

In Support of LD 1443

An Act to Make

9
.

Convicted Drug Felons Ineligible for

Submitted by the Department of Health and

Human

Hearing Date:

May 3,

TANF Assistance

Services Pursuant to Joint Rule 204

2013

F arnsworth and Members of the Joint Standing Committee, I am Dale Denno,
Family Independence. I am here today to speak in support of LD 1443 — An Act

Senator Craven, Representative
the Director for the
to

Make Convicted

Ofﬁce

for

Felons Ineligible for

TANF Assistance.

LD

1443 proposes to deny eligibility under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program for
who have been convicted of a felony drug offense after August 22, 1996. The LD also repeals the
prior statutory language allowing the Department of Health and Human Services to administer drug tests to
individuals

persons convicted of a drug-related felony, recognizing the legal and practical challenges raised
approach. This proposal allows the Department to conform
practical

and cost-effective solution

by

that

practices to federal law, and to implement a
monies from being allocated to drug felons.

its

to prevent public assistance

Work

Opportunity Reconciliation Act of
convicted of drug felonies from
been
1996 (PRWORA). Part of that legislation prohibited individuals who had
obtaining TANF beneﬁts. Maine has not, until now, aligned its rules to that standard. This proposal would
In 1996, the U.S. Congress passed the Personal Responsibility and

i

synchronize Maine standards with federal

rules.

LD

1443 recognizes the commonly-held belief that public ﬁnancial assistance should not be provided to
individuals who have been convicted of serious drug crimes. The long-term viability of any program of public

on the broad support of the body politic. The taxpayers of the States do not begrudge
providing TANF beneﬁts for the family whose breadwinner has lost their job, or become disabled, or has
otherwise suffered ﬁnancial disaster through no fault of their own—-these misfortunes can happen to anyone.
But for individuals who have chosen to engage in criminal behavior involving drugs-—most typically drug
trafﬁcking—there is no parallel public support for the disposition of public resources.
assistance depends

TANF beneﬁts to sign a written statement declaring
during the applicable period. For those individuals
of
a
drug
offense
Whether they have been convicted
felony
who have been so convicted, TANF beneﬁts will be denied. Administration will not be burdensome, and
program expectations Will be clear and precise. The Department believes that adoption of this LD will serve the
purpose of sending a message of condemnation of drug felonies, and will provide assurance to the taxpayers of
The

LD

requires individuals applying for or receiving

the State of Maine that their hard—earned

money will

not reward reprehensible personal behavior.

Page

1

of 2

Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy
myself available for questions at the work session.

to

answer any questions you may have and

to

make

Page 2

of 2

