Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OF MAINE
Testimony

in Opposition to

LD

WOMEN

1815

Good aftemoon, Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth, and members of the Health
and Human Services Committee. My name is Danna Hayes, the Director of Public Policy for the
Maine Women’s Lobby. We speak on behalf Maine’s 678,000 women and girls, focusing on
access to health care, freedom from violence, freedom from discrimination, and the issue that
affects all others:

I

economic

security.

am here to express our

opposition to

LD

1815,

An Act To

Require a Work Search for

Job-ready Applicants for Beneﬁts under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program. While we certainly agree that families in poverty need access to gainful employment,
we have concerns about preventing struggling Mainers from applying for beneﬁts at particularly
unstable times.

A 2010 study of TANF participants by researchers at UNE and UMO demonstrated that a
of
of the participants stated that they would not have a

signiﬁcant number of participants were in dire ﬁnancial
transportation or lack of child care.

place to live without

because they

left

TANF

81%

assistance.

straits

due to

disability, lack

Nearly a quarter reported that they applied for

TANF

an abusive relationship.

Last session, I came before you to support An Act to Improve Work Readiness for
Families Facing Significant Barriers to Employment. This law, which passed unanimously out of
this committee, addresses the barriers to TANF participants’ access to gainful employment in a

meaningful, long-lasting way. Forcing unprepared, struggling applicants to seek a number of
jobs before we can provide the stability of assistance will not address the range of reasons many
Mainers struggle to ﬁnd and maintain employment. In other states that have placed these types of

burdensome requirements on applicants, needy families have been turned away unnecessarily.
The implementation of last session’s efforts means that TANF participants will have access to
assessment and resources to seek gainful and lasting employment. We should be encouraging
this process which will truly move Mainers from public assistance to gainful employment by not
preemptively shutting the door on applicants in such a desperate time. We urge you to vote ought
not to pass.

Thank you.

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330

0 207.622.0851 O dhayes@mainewomen.org

WWw.mainewomen.org

