Testimony of the Office of the Governor
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
in Support of

LD

1815, 1820, 1822, 1842

An Act to Require a Work Search

for Job-Ready Applicants for Beneﬁts under the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program through
Restriction of Electronic Beneﬁt Transfers
An Act to Act to Increase Integrity in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program through Restriction of Expenditures
An Act to Amend the Laws Governing the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families
Program

Public Hearing:

March

25,

2014

Senator Craven, Representative Farnswoith, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Human Services. I am Holly Lusk, Senior Health Policy Advisor in the Ofﬁce of the

Health and

Govemor.
bills:

LDs

I

appreciate this opportunity to testify in support of the

Govemor’s

welfare reform

1815, 1820, 1822, and 1842.

LD

1815:

the

Temporary

An Act to Require

a

Work Search

for Job-Ready Applicants for Benefits under

Assistance for Needy Families

TANF

Program

employment
before they start receiving beneﬁts. The purpose of this bill is to ensure that someone who needs
ﬁnancial assistance is taking a multi-pronged approach—looking for employment at the same
This

bill

requires that job-ready

applicants submit three applications for

time as applying for taxpayer-funded help. Currently, 18 other states and the District of
Columbia have job search requirements as a condition of eligibility before or during the
application process.

would need to be submitted at any time during a three-week
period starting one week prior to the TAN F application date to two weeks after the TANF
application is submitted. The reason we picked this time frame was so as not to lengthen the

As

the bill states, these applications

existing period of time between application date and the time an applicant begins receiving

beneﬁts.

complements the work DHHS is already doing with the Department of Education and
the Department of Labor to focus on getting TANF recipients back to productive employment if
they face barriers. The Department has some excellent ideas on how to implement this bill so
that folks coming in to apply can immediately sign up and apply through the DOL Job Bank.
This bill emphasizes the important value of employment and remaining in the workforce, and
encourages self-sufﬁciency before dependency. We are pleased to submit this legislation, and
This

bill

are thankful to Rep. Fredette for putting this idea forth originally before Legislative Council.

1

1

LD

1820:

An Act to Reduce Abuse of the Temporary Assistance

Program through

Restriction of Electronic

for

Needy Families

Beneﬁt Transfers

use of the EBT card, whether through ATMs or point of sale devices,
TANF beneﬁts outside the state. DHHS data indicates that many individuals who have
Maine EBT cards are accessing their TANF beneﬁts for consistent periods of time outside the
This

bill limits electronic

to access

state——sometimes upwards of a year.

have taken varying approaches to ensure that recipients who have left their state do not
on their TANF programs. For example, they limit the period of time a card can be used out

States

stay

it will be shut off due to a rebuttable presumption of lack of residency. Other
have taken a similar approach in examining geographic restrictions on use of the cards.
Minnesota, for example, has implemented a geographic restriction to that state and those that

of state before
states

border

it.

DHHS

data indicates

EBT cards have been used across the United

States,

and even in some U.S.

know many constituents take issue with paying for the travel
of these temporarily needy families. This bill would not prohibit withdrawal of cash beneﬁts to
be taken across state lines. A TANF recipient can still use their cash all across the country—this
bill helps to ensure that the people in our TANF program are Mainers.
territories like the

Additionally,

Maine

I

that We have been contacted many times regarding the appearance of
drug busts in Maine. If an individual trafﬁcs their EBT card to purchase

would add

EBT cards

something
given

I

Virgin Islands.

at

like drugs,

which

may take it across

they need to understand the individual to Whom the card is
and the recipient could suffer the consequences of an out of

is illegal,

state lines,

state use.

LD

1822:

Families

An Act to Act to Increase

Program through

Integrity in the

Temporary Assistance

for

Needy

Restriction of Expenditures

use of TANF beneﬁts from being spent on certain items: alcohol, tobacco,
gambling activities, or bail. Federal law has outlined goals for the TANF
program, which include assisting needy families to care for children, and to promote work and
marriage in order to reduce dependency. Because federal TANF funds are issued in block
grants, states are allowed ﬂexibility in administering the program. States also are responsible for
ensuring program integrity.
This

bill restricts

lottery tickets,

We believe that spending TANF dollars on alcohol, tobacco, lottery tickets, gambling activities,
bail does not further the goals of the TANF program. Indeed, this is why many states are
restricting how TANF funds are spent. These efforts are a complement to state and federal
efforts to limit where TANF funds are accessed through ATMs. Currently, Maine is in the
process of restricting access to TANF funds at ATMs in locations such as liquor stores, casinos,
and

and

strip clubs.

We believe this bill is an effective next step in deterring TANF recipients from using funds
inappropriately, and to encourage those dollars to be spent

on the

true needs

of the family.

2

LD

1842:

Families
This

bill

An Act to Amend

the

Laws Governing

the

Temporary Assistance

for

Needy

Program

TANF
government has required that TANF

attempts to address a problematic disconnect between state and federal

regulations. For nearly the last

20 years, the federal

recipient parents participate in approximately 30-35 hours per

week of work

There are

activities.

work requirement. Soon after the federal welfare reform was
Maine legislated a series of state exceptions to eliminate sanctions for failure to meet
the federal work requirement. Under Maine law, TANF recipients could not be sanctioned for
failure to abide by the federal work requirement if they met one of many state exceptions:
inclement weather kept them from going to work, they were victims of domestic violence, they
were incarcerated, they had some other good cause, etc.
very few

federal exceptions to this

enacted,

For most of the time these

state exceptions

have been in place, the federal government did not

work requirement. That has changed. Maine has received communication from
the federal government that it is now imposing ﬁnancial penalties on states whose TANF
populations fail to meet the work participation rate requirements. The federal government
intends to impose a penalty on Maine for years 2007-2010 in the total amount of approximately
$13 million. For each successive year the state fails to meet the requirements, a ﬁne is assessed.
truly enforce the

TANF work participation rate meets federal requirements, we need help
from the Legislature in bringing our TANF laws back in line with the federal law. That is the
essence of this bill—eliminating provisions that negatively affect our work participation rate.
This includes elimination of the state work exceptions, and of a program called Parents as
Scholars. Parents as Scholars is a program that was developed to assist TANF recipients to
obtain 2- or 4-year degrees. While federal law only permits vocational educational work to
fulﬁll the work participation requirement for 12 months that an individual is on TANF, the state
law allowed Parents as Scholars to count educational work for up to 24 months. Therefore,
unfortunately, the federal govermnent counts the individuals in Parents as Scholars against the
state’s work participation rate once they pass the 12-month lifetime threshold. This does not
mean that these individuals have to cease going to school, nor does it mean that they will have no
job training. What it means is that the federal government holds them to the same standard as
everyone else in the TANF program, and in addition to going to school, they must meet the
In order to ensure our

federal

Work requirement.

am pleased to

report that we do believe that the domestic violence exception can be retained in
law because the Governor has asked the Department to submit a domestic violence waiver
request to the federal government. This would allow those claiming the domestic violence
exception under Maine law not to count against the work participation requirement. I encourage
the Committee through its amendment process to remove the domestic violence exception from
the current bill, meaning that the exception would remain in law.
I

state

“

I

would be happy

information at the

to

answer any questions you may have and

work

to provide

any additional

session.

3

