Testimony of Susan Wasserott, Director of Legislative Affairs

Maine Department of Labor
In Support of

LD 1815, “An Act To Require a Work Search for Job-ready Applicants for
Beneﬁts under the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program"
Before

The Joint Standing Committee on

Health
Sponsored By:

& Human Services

Representative Fredette of Hampden

Date of Hearing: March 25, 2014

Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on

Health

& Human

Services,

my name

is

Susan Wasserott and

I

am

the Director of Legislative

of LD 1815, “An Act
To Require a Work Search for Job-ready Applicants for Beneﬁts under the Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families (TAN F) Program."
Affairs for the

Maine Department of Labor.

I

am here to

testify in support

tremendous value in work -- not only in terms of providing income, but also in tenns of
providing a sense of purpose and self-Worth and forging relationships with colleagues and
connections to the larger community. VVhen individuals are experiencing the types of fmancial
There

is

difficulty that

would bring them

unemployed

a

is

to

difficult challenge,

TANF,

the best long-term solution is employment. Being

and the sooner individuals can get back

to

work, the

better.

A

LD 1815 proposes a Work-search requirement for job-ready applicants of TANF.
similar
requirement exists as a condition for individuals to receive unemployment (UI) beneﬁts under
both

state

and federal law in all states. Individuals must be able and available to Work and
work each Week in which they submit a claim for beneﬁts. Similar to the UI

actively seeking

requirement, this proposal requires that job ready individuals applying for the

conduct a work search.

It is

my

TANF

program

understanding that they would be assisted in further job searches

as well.

v

t

I thought it might be helpful to provide some
on our experience. With UI, satisfying the work search requirements means that
claimants must produce veriﬁable documentation of their application for at least three jobs for
each Week in which they claim beneﬁts. Veriﬁable documentation of application includes items
like the business name, address, telephone number, position title, and name of the contact person,
if known. For example, a printout of the email submitted with a resume attached, could serve as

Since the department has a similar requirement,

insights based

evidence.

In the electronics age,

We ﬁnd

that

many employers use an on—line
we recommend

provides no veriﬁable documentation. In these cases,

application system that
that applicants print the

transmitting it; especially the conﬁrmation page. Our experience also suggests
do not always maintain records of those who applied, particularly those Who Walk
in without an appointment. It helps when applicants keep their own documentation to provide
proof when needed.

application

when

that employers

We would encourage TANF

Maine Job Bank as part of their job search.
Right now over 6,900 jobs are available through the job bank. Once registered, an applicant is
matched with open jobs and emailed a referral to which they can respond to initiate an
application. The Maine Job Bank uses an on-line application system so applicants would want to
print their application, including the conﬁrmation page, to document their submission. The link
to the Maine Job Bank can be found here:
applicants to access the

https://gatewavmaine.gov/dol/njbﬁobseekerﬁobseekerwelcomeaspx

The Department of Labor supports this bill because it dovetails nicely with the department’s
commitment of serving Maine Workers and businesses. We understand that people often need a
hand up when tough times come. As I mentioned earlier, the best Way to prevent or reduce the
need for assistance
ensure that the

is

employment. Encouraging a job search as part of a TANF application helps
Temporary.

T in TANF truly is

Thank you for your consideration of this testimony. On behalf of the department, I urge you to
vote Ought to Pass when the bill comes to a vote. In the meantime, I am happy to answer
questions.

