Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OF MAINE
Testimony in Opposition

Good

to

WOMEN

LDs 1820 and 1822

afternoon, Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth,

and members of the Health

Human Services Committee. My name is Danna Hayes, the Director of Public Policy for the
Maine Women’s Lobby. We speak on behalf Maine’s 678,000 women and girls, focusing on
and

access to health care, freedom from violence, freedom from discrimination, and the issue that
affects all others:

I

economic

am here to

security.

express our opposition to

LDs 1820 and

1822, two bills which seek to limit

the use of EBT cards to certain locations and types of purchases. There are a

Why

these proposals pose logistical challenges to implementation, but our

number of reasons
main concems are that

they are rooted in stereotypes and do not address the actual causes of poverty.

We can all agree that fraud in public assistance

should be addressed. But

we believe the

response should be proportional to any alleged abuse. The amount of money and resources these
bills propose to expend are, even based on the Department’s own research, absolutely

would merely further inaccurate stereotypes about
low-income Mainers. Massachusetts recently worked to impose similar restrictions on EBT use
and had little to show for their extensive efforts. We should not be heading down this same road.
disproportionate to any alleged misuse and

The truth is that Mainers are falling further into poverty and we should be spending our
time and resources supporting programs with evidenced-based approaches to ending the need for
public assistance at

all.

TANF

by women. 12,500 Maine

serves families with very

children live in

homes

little

that receive

income, most of which are headed

TANF

assistance.

The maximum

TANF beneﬁt for a family of three is

$485 a month, an amount which has remained static since
qualify for TANF could afford even the most basic
necessities with this amount, and it should not be surprising to learn that in 2010, 58% of TANF
participants reported to researchers from University of New England and University of MaineOrono that they had to utilize food pantries. 29% got behind on their rent, and 37% reported
having their electricity shut off. The vast majority of TANF participants are just scraping by and
trying to survive. We should be devoting our time and energy toward ending poverty and
reducing the need for assistance by providing opportunity for all Mainers to thrive instead of
demonizing those who are struggling.
2001.

It is

hard to imagine

how families who

Thank you.

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330

9 207.622.0851 0 dhayes@mainew0men.org

www.mainewomen.org

