Good

afternoon,

my name

is

Heidi Hart.

am

I

an attorney with Richardson, Whitman,

& Badger, which has

ofﬁces in Portland and Bangor and practices statewide. I am
also a former teen parent, a former TANF recipient, and a graduate of the Parents as

Large

working poor, married, conservative Christian parents, I am
the second of ﬁve children. From my earliest memories, poverty was a familiar state of
affairs, and I still can recall the shame that I felt as a child because of my family’s
ﬁnancial struggles. My father was an abusive man, so it was something of a relief when
Scholars program.

my

Born

parents separated

to

when

I

was twelve years

Unfortunately, this relief

old.

was

short-

family plunged deeper and deeper into the hopelessness, degradation, and
despair of poverty. I watched my now-single mother struggle to raise ﬁve emotionallyscarred children on next to nothing. I saw how her mother was treated by those who were
lived, as

my

supposed to be there to help her. It made me angry and sad to see my mother cry because
she didn’t know how she would meet all of our most basic needs every month. Could she
afford food if she didn’t pay the electric bill‘? Would we run out of money for heat in the
middle of the month and spend days wrapped in blankets around a tiny electric heater‘? I
spent my early life dreaming of a way out of this suffering and uncertainty.
Understanding the value of education and its relationship to ﬁnancial security and
success, I fervently hoped that I could somehow make it to college someday.

But a childhood spent in poverty can deter any hope of a better future. The need to
escape from the daily misery can lead children to make risky choices that threaten their
chances for success. And when I learned that I was pregnant at the age of 15, my dreams
for a safe and secure future nearly collapsed. I became convinced that my own beautiful
daughter would be sentenced to a life like my own—-—one of deprivation, hunger, cold,
I promised my new baby that I would do
embarrassment, shame, and depression.
everything possible to make her life better than my own had been so far. However,
without any job skills or experience, I didn’t even know how I could support myself, let
alone this precious child who depended on me. I became severely depressed and sought
treatment. As I began to recover, and with the help of my family and others, I managed

G.E.D. and applied to the University of Southern Maine, where I was accepted.
At least at that time, the University was committed to providing quality child care for
housing on
students who were also parents, along with offering designated family
campus. The ﬁnancial plan for my college attendance was that I would pay for tuition,
and child care with student loans and grants. I would also rely on welfare
to get

my

housing,

assistance to ﬁll the gap between the student ﬁnancial aid available to

me

and the actual

costs of living.

began hearing reports on the news
people on welfare,
about welfare reform. I heard people and politicians talking about
met a person on
except that it seemed to me that the people talking had never actually
“those people” were really like. I
welfare, because they told all kinds of lies about what
should leave welfare and go
heard a whole bunch of talk about how low-income parents
to
I was terriﬁed that I would have
to work, but I didn’t hear anything about education.

Almost immediately

after I started college classes,

'

l

I

drop out of college and become trapped in an endless cycle of

minimum wage

employment and Welfare. I knew that the employment available to me would not pay
nearly enough to support myself and my daughter. I also knew that I could not continue
to live a life of suffering and deprivation, and I feared what I might do or where I might
end up if faced with no real options or opportunity.

who

ﬁnding long-term solutions for people trapped
in poverty and on welfare were already working on a solution, although unbeknownst to
me, which would enable me to reach my dreams. I soon learned from a friend about
something called the Parents as Scholars program, which had been created by the Maine
Legislature to help people just like us. My friend was just one of a number of lowincome student parents I would see graduate from the PAS program and go on to
establish professional, stable and secure lives in Maine. I learned that the PaS program
would provide some additional help like ﬁnancial assistance to purchase books and
supplies and clothing vouchers to purchase appropriate business attire for job interviews,
but most importantly, the creation of this program meant that I didn’t have to drop out of
college and watch my dream of a better life and future for my daughter and myself
disappear before my eyes. I also learned how lucky I was to live in Maine during welfare
reform, as only one other state, Wyoming, also understood that education was a key
component to any strategy to move people permanently from welfare to work, from
poverty to ﬁnancial security, and from despair to hope.
Fortunately, people

When

I

graduated from

really cared about

USM, my

daughter walked across the stage with

me to accept my

degree. Even at her young age, she understood the immeasurable worth of education. I
started working full-time just two days after my graduation, and I left the welfare rolls for

That was almost thirteen years ago. Then, a year after graduating, the federal
TANF legislation was up for reauthorization. Knowing how important education was to
my success, I agreed to attend a meeting with other PaS graduates and Maine’s own
Senator Olympia Snowe. I still have the picture of me standing next to Senator Snowe,
and I will always remember how thrilled I was when she decided to propose an
amendment to the TANF reauthorization bill that would enable low-income parents
good.

Unfortunately, while Senator
throughout the country to attend college.
amendment received unanimous support in committee, it did not become law.

I

never understood the political opposition to

side of the political aisle

you

Snowe’s

Because no matter which
program should be a no-brainer. If

this sensible idea.

are on, support for this

people to leave welfare and poverty behind for good, education is
key to achieving that goal because education is key to securing the kind of job that will
As a taxpaying citizen, my lifelong
provide ﬁnancial independence and security.

your goal

is

to enable

was made in me
The expected course of my daughter’s life was also
through the PaS program.
1996 to
dramatically changed because of the wise decision that Maine made back in
contribution to this State will far outweigh the short-term investment that

create this

program and provide a

lifeline to

people like me.
2

The cost-beneﬁt

Please, do not cut the Parents as Scholars program.

analysis, in terms

of

both money and human lives, weighs in favor of keeping this opportunity open for lowincome parents. This program has demonstrated success in transforming people’s lives

and economic opportunities.

I

am

just one of

many who have beneﬁted from

this

destroy this program based on false assumptions
and ugly stereotypes about people on Welfare would be especially egregious. Cutting or
eliminating the PAS program is completely counter-productive to the goal of helping
sensible approach to welfare reform.

To

families permanently leave welfare and poverty.

committee

fully

Sincerely,

Heidi

J.

hope

that the

members of

this

how foolish and irresponsible that would be, and I hope you
like me of the hope of a better and more secure future.

understand

refuse to deprive people

I

Hart

3

