Testimony before the Health and

March

Human Services Committee

25, 2014

i

Re:

LD

1842;

"An Act To Amend the Laws Governing the Temporary Assistance

for

Needy

Families Program"
Luisa

S.

Deprez, Professor of Sociology, University of Southern Maine

and
Sandra

S. Butler,

Professor of Social Work, University of Maine

OPENING THE DOORS TO HIGHER EDUCATION FOR LOW-INCOME WOMEN:
THE SUCCESS OF MAINE’S PARENTS AS SCHOLARS PROGRAM‘
Maine's decision in 1996 to
national reform

was

philosophy of
possibilities for higher education

resist the force-welfare—recipients-into-any-job

visionary‘ Instead of cutting off
.

poor people temporarily in need of public assistance, Maine continued along the
it had embarked upon 15 years earlier. The state would continue to help low~
income mothers improve their job prospects through higher education, so they could
enjoy better workforce opportunities in the future. Taking such a thoughtful and
humane approach to welfare reform was novel at the time, and still is. Maine's
approach has proved itself over time and has spread to more states: Hawaii,
Pennsylvania, Kentucky, Illinois, Nebraska, and California are among them.
for

route

As Maine demonstrated, providing welfare recipients with access to postsecondary
education can improve their prospects for a life without poverty. Everyone benefits

when that happens.
The Evidence Shows

-

Positive Gains

'

Across the United States, only about six percent of welfare recipients are enrolled in
some kind of educational program, but 90 percent of them find jobs paying two to three
times more than the typical wages earned by people on welfare. Good outcomes for

Maine’s
this

college students

on welfare

are well-documented.

We surveyed members of

cohort three times— in 1999, 2001, and 2006-— to learn about their educational

employment status, and family life. Our findings parallel what has been
found in many studies showing that higher education is one of the most promising
pathways out of poverty:
experiences,

'

Nine out

of ten of the beneficiaries of Maine's

their lives - including

program report positive changes

improved family finances, promotions
ownership, fewer family crises, and good outcomes at school

at

work,

home

for their children.

in

Compared

to other welfare recipients, parent-scholars require

funded support
'

More than

one-third reported that their confidence had increased and
consequently their goals had changed - heightened - for both themselves and their
children.

around
'

~

fewer publicly

services.

Many respondents

in dramatic

and

credited higher education for turning their lives

positive ways.

Maine's employers have benefitted from access to a better-educated work force.
In our final survey, 44 percent of Maine welfare-students who had received a
degree reported earning a bachelor's degree. This helps Maine's tax base, because

Census data show that people who complete two years of college earn around
30 percent more than those with just high school diplomas, and those who earn
four-year bachelor's degrees earn 32 percent more than the two-year graduates.
U.S.

Education:

The Road

to

Independence

Education beyond high school is the door to the middle class in twenty-first century
America. Studies have consistently found that educational success after high school

and the country as a whole. The economic benefits are
clear and logical: increased access to jobs with good wages and health benefits; lower
risks of unemployment; and better chances to hold onto jobs during economic
downturns. In addition, people who have successfully continued their education
beyond high school enjoy enriched personal lives, greater self~esteern and confidence,
improved family relationships, and higher aspirations for their children.
leads to gains for individuals

With so many good things connected to continuing education, it makes little sense to
prevent poor women on welfare from attending college. The 1996 federal rules ignored
- and threatened to discontinue - decades of earlier progress in helping low—income
mothers obtain a college education so they could pull themselves and their children out
of poverty. Among the most vulnerable in our country, poorfamilies mostly headed by
women were suddenly told to ”end dependency” and "become self-sufficient” without
any access to advanced education.
Thoughtfully and strategically, the state of Maine decided to persevere in
longstanding efforts to

make

its

college attendance possible for low-income mothers

on

Welfare so as to improve their prospects in the labor market. The Maine "Parents as
Scholars” program has paid off well for the state as well as people on public assistance,

providing them with access to postsecondary education programs that can improve
without poverty.

their prospects for a life

I

