Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OP MAINE VVOMEN
Testimony in Opposition

Good

to

LD

1842

afternoon, Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth, and

members of the Health

Human Services Committee. My name is Damia Hayes, the Director of Public Policy for the
Maine Women’s Lobby. We speak on behalf Maine’s 678,000 women and girls, focusing on
and

access to health care, freedom from violence, freedom from discrimination, and the issue that
affects all others:

economic

We oppose LD

security.

1842,

An Act T0 Amend the Laws Governing the Temporary Assistance

for Needy Families Program. We have serious concerns both about the removal of the good
cause exemption to TANF ’s work requirements and the elimination of the Parents as Scholars

Program.

There are several reasons why a DHHS caseworker may determine an applicant has
demonstrated good cause so as to justify exemption from the work requirements of the TANF
program. Lack of child care and transportation are very real barriers to seeking employment for

many low-income Women —barriers

that perhaps circularly, could be eliminated with the help of
even more distressing is that this bill does not include an
exception for victims of domestic violence and sexual assault. Since nearly a quarter of TANF
participants in UNE and UMO’s 2010 study reported that ﬂeeing a violent relationship caused
them to seek out public assistance, we have reason to believe that families in extremely
dangerous and desperate situations will be unable to access help. It is not uncommon for ﬁnances
to prohibit a woman’s escape from a violent situation, especially a woman with children like

TANF

assistance. VVhat is perhaps

those seeking

make

it

TANF assistance.

impossible for

many

The elimination of this good cause provision may ultimately

families to seek safety.

We are also extremely disappointed at the proposed elimination of the Parents as
Scholars Program, which is truly a pathway out of poverty with a proven track record of success.
The program provides low-income parents, mostly women, with the rare opportunity to seek the

and the education to improve chances of obtaining gainful, higher wage employment. This
a program that sets up low-income families for more economically stable futures and reduces

skills
is

their

need for public assistance. This

investing at a time

when our poverty

is

exactly the type of program in which

rate continues to climb.

valuable program, and to vote ought not to pass on

LD

we

should be

We urge you not to eliminate this

1842.

Thank you.

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330 0

207.622.0851 O dhayes@mainewomen.org

www.mainewomen.org

