HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

,

STATE HOUSE STATION
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0002
2

1”“
Andrew M.

TTY:

Residence:
Business:

E

Mail:

‘

(207) 287-4469

Gattine

529 Stroudwater
Westbrook,

(207) 287-1400

Street

ME

04092
(207) 854-3025
(207) 272-2781

dgattine@a0l.com

March 25, 2014
Testimony of Representative Drew Gattine
LD 1829 An Act to Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Report
Annually on Investigations and Prosecutions of False Claims Made under the MaineCare,
—

Temporary Assistance

to

Needy Families and Food Supplement Programs

Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and

Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth and distinguished

am Drew

Human Services

members of the
Gattine, and

Joint Standing

represent District

Committee on Criminal Justice and Public Safety, I
126 which is part of the City of Westbrook. I am here today to present LD 1829 - An Act to
Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Report Annually on Investigations and
Prosecutions of False Claims Made under the MaineCare, Temporary Assistance to Needy
Families and

Food Supplement Programs.

The purpose of this
our

human

l

legislation is to ensure that the state’s

services programs

is

approach to managing public dollars in

comprehensive and well coordinated.

stewards of public funds to take action to

make

We have an obligation as

sure that public dollars are well managed,

dispensed for the purpose for which they are allocated and deliver the optimal value for the
people and programs they serve. The State, through the Department of Human Services,

manages multiple programs designed to deliver public support to Maine citizens and the integrity
of each of those programs must be maintained through efforts that are comprehensive, fair and
based on facts. The public has a right to know that program integrity measures are in effect that
ensure that funds that support public programs are spent effectively and appropriately.
Preventing and detecting fraudulent, abusive, and wasteful practices is an essential responsibility
of Maine government. Fraud, waste and abuse have a negative impact on everyone involved in
the system, including the recipients of services; the taxpayers who pay for them; and providers

who Work hard

in partnership with the state to provide quality care.

A failure to maintain

program integrity undermines program functioning and diverts scarce and valuable resources
from their mission. It can seriously diminish public trust in the ability to deliver taxpayer-funded
assistance in an accountable and transparent manner.

District l26

Westbrook

(part)
Printed on recycled paper

I

Program integrity includes the ﬁght against fraud but is much more than that. A comprehensive
and modern program integrity curriculum includes all of the traditional fraud, waste and abuse
that:
tools focusing on investigation, recovery and prosecution and recovery but also assures

The Department has

-

clear policies in place to

make

sure that

all

stakeholders understand the

and expectations
The Department has appropriate, well designed and well functioning systems in place to
make sure that ftmds and beneﬁts are dispensed in accordance with the rules
The Department’s resources deployed to manage, investigate and audit these programs have
the best information and tools available to them and are focused on the activities that will

rules
-

-

-

have the greatest ﬁscal and law enforcement impact
The Department is coordinating to the maximum extent possible with other agencies,
General’s office
including but not limited to the federal government and the Maine Attorney

-

The Department

-

maximizing the use of technology, including technology that has already
been purchased and implemented, in its program integrity efforts
The Department’s processes for recovering money and avoiding improper expenditures are
effective, efﬁcient and fair to all stakeholders
is

do the best job in program integrity take a measured and comprehensive approach
understand
that begins with a data driven assessment. You cannot solve a problem unless you
what the problem is, what causes it and how to measure it. In government especially, resources
will always have limits and you will always have competing priorities for administrative
ﬁlnctions and unless you understand the extent of the problems and what the problem is costing

The

states that

'

you will not be able to

set effective priorities.

This legislation will require an annual report from DHHS to the Joint Standing Committees on
Appropriations and Financial Affairs and Health and Human Services that will describe in detail
that will allow the
all of the Department’s program integrity efforts along with information
We
already make a
efforts.
those
of
legislature to evaluate and determine the effectiveness
signiﬁcant investment in these activities and we need to be in a position where we can assess the
effectiveness of that investment before we invest more. The report will focus on the MaineCare,

TANF

and Food Supplement programs. At a minimum the report will contain:
a.

A description of all of the Department’s program integrity efforts (including third
party liability, estate recovery, casualty recovery and credit balance recoveries),
including a description of how the Department’s program integrity personnel and

resources are organized and deployed within the Department, information about
the number of cases opened, the dollars identiﬁed and the dollars recovered
b.

c.

Appropriate information regarding fraud cases referred to the Attorney General’s
Health Care Crimes Unit, understanding that detailed information regarding on-

going criminal investigations cannot be disclosed
An evaluation of the performance of the Department’s vendors with respect to the
duties they perform. Are we getting good value from them and are they focused

on the

right things?

d.

e.

f.

Information about the Department’s participation in the various national
how
initiatives required by the federal govermnent, such as RAC and PERM and
initiatives
those initiatives either support or divert resources from other important

of any federal audits of the Department’s program integrity activities,
including weaknesses identiﬁed or best practices identiﬁed
A description of any known defects, deﬁciencies weaknesses in any systems
managed or utilized by the Department that result in the improper or inaccurate
payment of claims or beneﬁts including but not limited to the Depa1tment’s

The

results

Medicaid information system, provider enrollment system or eligibility
determination systems. An estimate of the ﬁnancial impact of these issues and a
timeline for
g.

h.

when they will be ﬁxed.

A description of any plamied investments in technology contemplated by the
Department to improve its program integrity activities, including efforts to
prevent improper payments before they are made
A description of any policy improvements made by the Department designed
improve correct and accurate payment of claims and beneﬁts

to

These efforts are critically important. We have talked about them from time to time in this
committee as issues and problems have come up. My sense is that in many of these areas the
Department is doing very good job but in other areas we don’t really have all of the information
and provide the
necessary to know whether or not that is the case. In order for us to do our jobs
report
proper level of support to the Department We need to see the complete picture and this

would be an important

tool leading us in that direction.

