Testimony of the
Department of Health and Human Services
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and
Neither for nor against

An Act to Require the Department
Investigations

of Health

and

LD

J

Human Services

1829

Human Services To Report Annually on

and Prosecutions of False Claims Made under the MaineCare, Temporary

Assistance for Needy Families and Food Supplement Programs

Sponsored by: Representative Drew Gattine
Hearing Date: March 25, 2014
Senator Craven, Representative Farnsworth and

Members of the

Joint Standing

Committee on the

Human Services, I am Herb Downs, Director of the Division of Audit at the Department of
Health and Human Services. I am here today to speak neither for nor against LD 1829, An Act to
Require the Department of Health and Human Services to Report Annually on Investigations and
Prosecutions of False Claims Made under the MaineCare, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families and
Health and

Food Supplement Programs.

The Department supports the

basic principle of this bill

the Department’s programs namely, program integrity.

which requires reporting on a vital function of

We believe it is important that the Legislature

and the public have the opportunity to view the work we are undertaking. It is essential that public
welfare dollars be well managed and free from Waste and abuse. One dollar spent inappropriately is one
dollar too

many!

The work outlined in this bill is substantive and will require a major commitment on the part of our team
in the Program Integrity unit as well as strong collaboration with MaineCare Services and the Office of
Family Independence.

We are still assessing the ﬁscal impact of this work, but it is clear that in order to

undertake the work as outlined, the Department will need at least one additional position dedicated in a
full

time capacity to gathering

this data.

A signiﬁcant amount of the information that will need to be collected resides in a variety of databases
and systems. Accounting information
is

stored in

QNXT,

eligibility

is

AdvantageMe, enrollment and claims information
kept in ACES and investigations are kept in various

collected in

information

is

To make changes to systems to collect this data will take either changes to current systems or
the purchase of a new case management system or both. Additionally, contracts with vendors may need
to be amended to incorporate the new reporting requirements. We are currently undergoing the process
databases.

of assessing the additional cost that would be incurred based on these changes.
Before ﬁnal passage of this bill, the Department would like to work with the sponsors to ensure the
clearly outlines the sponsor’s intent. We are concerned that there may be some ambiguity in the
language, leaving unresolved question which

may be problematic

as the

bill

Department begins

implementation.

Thank you for your time and attention. I would be happy to answer any
make myself available for questions at the work session.

questions you

may have

and to

