April

15,2015
United Way of
Greater Portland

Testimony

LD

368:

An Act To

369:

LD
LD

Opposition

to:

Integrate the State's General Assistance

Needy

LD

in

and Temporary Assistance for

Families Programs

An Act To

Align Municipal General Assistance Programs with the Immigration
Status Policies of the Department of Health and Human Services

1035:

1037:

An Act To Create

An Act To

a 9-month Time Limit on General Assistance Benefits

Establish a 180-day Residency Requirement for Welfare Benefits

By Alysia Melnick,

Director of Public Policy, United

Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and distinguished

Committee on Health and Human Services,
Public Policy at United

Way of Greater

my name

is

Portland. United

Way of Greater Portland

members

of the Joint Standing

Alysia Melnick,

and

l

am

Way of Greater Portland

the Director of

envisions a

community that works together to ensure children succeed in school, individuals live healthy lives,
and everyone has the opportunity to achieve financial well-being. We are a committed partner in
moving people up a financial stability continuum, and support various agencies, programs, and
strategies to do so.

Thank you

for the opportunity to testify

on LDs 368, 369, 1035 and 1037.

We oppose these bills.

General Assistance is a program of last resort in part because recipients must make a good faith
effort to secure other resources before they can receive assistance. General Assistance is
intended as a temporary support to help cover food, medication, utilities, heat, and shelter for
individuals and families in crisis once other resources are no longer available.1 General
Assistance effectively provides temporary, essential support to people, most of whom have
worked, are working, or who will again work? For the vast majority of recipients, General
Assistance is a short term support that helps people on the path to independence. City of Bangor
General Assistance staff report that 81% of recipients receive assistance for 5 months or less and
for Fiscal Year 2014, Portland reported 52% of recipients received assistance for 6 months or
less.3 Moreover, in Fiscal Year 2014 in Portland, 92% of the assistance granted was used for
rent, shelter

beds, and fo0d.4

1

22 M.R.S. §4s17.
According to 2012 research from the University of New England, about 80% of Maine General Assistance
recipients had worked in the past five years, 60% had substantial physical or mental health conditions limiting
their ability to work, and 92% said that without General Assistance they would have had no place to live.
University of New England School of Social Work, “2012 Survey of Longer Term General Assistance Recipients:
Preliminary Findings.” October 17, 2012.
http://www.portlancimainegov/DocumentCenter/Home/View/7,160
2

3

id

1

The changes suggested

some of our most vulnerable
changes to General
Assistance proposed in these bills are implemented, the issue of homelessness, already a
problem, could be exacerbated and the pressures on shelters, food pantries and other low/no
barrier services could be overwhelming as more people lose the assistance that allows them to
remain in their homes.5 General Assistance can serve as a bridge for people from Maine and
neighbors, and,

in turn,

in

these proposals could dramatically harm

negatively impact our state.

lf

the

eligibility

from away to become active, integrated, hard working, tax paying members of our communities;
these bills have the potential to limit the ability of people to contribute to our economy.“

The unfortunate

reality is that individuals and families continue to struggle. The difficult economy
and rising housing costs have left some Mainers with few places to turn. General Assistance is
one of those few programs available for temporary, life-saving support to people in need. it is
therefore troubling to consider changes to the program that would weaken or undermine it and in
the process impose high human and economic costs. We also believe LD 1037 is

unconstitutional.

We,

you, are committed to transparency and accountability, and understand that recently,
concerns have been raised as to eligibility of some recipients of services. These
concerns merit review, and we would welcome the opportunity to work with the State and other
interested organizations to assess the current system and recommend improvements. However,
we believe that our State's most vulnerable must not be left to fend for themselves while
improvements are made.
like

specific

While each of these bills aims to achieve a different outcome, they all will have the likely effect of
preventing people in crisis from getting the assistance they need to successfully confront difficult
situations and become independent. United Way of Greater Portland is a committed partner in
fighting poverty and homelessness. The services we help fund, however, cannot replace a public
commitment to serving people in need.
For

all

these reasons,

Thank you

for

we

respectfully urge

you

to

oppose these

bills.

your leadership and service.

Alysia Melnick, Director of Public Policy
United Way of Greater Portland; amelnick@unitedwaygp.org

5

in January 2015, 489 individuals resided in a homeless shelter on a given night in Portland alone. In this same
month, ninety of the intakes represented people homeless for the first time.
http://vvww.portlandmainegov/ArchiveCenter/ViewFile/item/584
6
Research shows that foreign born individuals have high rates of entrepreneurship, job creation, and add
diversity that plays out in a variety of concrete and substantial economic rewards. Immigrants launch more than
‘A of businesses, are more than twice as likely to start a business as native-born citizens and are founders of
nearly half of America's top venture-funded companies. “The Most Entrepreneurial Group in America Wasn't
Born in America” lnc., Magazine November 2014. In Maine, from 2006 to 2011, there were 2,711 new
immigrant business owners who generated a total net business income of $120 million. “The Political and
Economic Power of Immigrants, Latinos, and Asians in the Pine Tree State.” Immigration Policy Center. January
2015.

2

