MCE
Ma ne
i

$0ne Weston Court, Box 2 Augusta, ME
207-4-30-8334

(;Qa|itiQn tg

04330

www.mcedv.org

End Domestic Violence
April 15,

2015

Integrate the State's General Assistance and
Programs
Families
Assistance for Needy
Re:

LD 368: An Act To

Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and

members

Temporary

of the Committee:

Regina Rooney, and I represent the Maine Coalition to End Domestic
Violence. I am here to provide information in opposition to LD 368: An Act To
Integrate the State's General Assistance and Temporary Assistance for Needy

My name

is

Families Programs.

would note that several of the bills
before us today share a theme: they place more limitations on the way that Maine's
economic safety net can be accessed. have provided written testimony on LD 1037

While

I

will restrict

my testimony to LD

368,

I

I

as well. Our concerns around that bill are very similar to our concerns with this
one: that setting up timeframes for when a person can access assistance is harmful
to victims of abuse, whose complex circumstances do not fit within neat timeframes

MCEDV recognizes the importance of a safety net ﬂexible enough to meet
the evolving needs of victims. General Assistance (GA)

is

a vital part of that

net.

Leaving an abusive relationship is a process. It takes the average person
seven times before they leave for good. They are pulled back to the
relationship for many reasons—fear, concerns for the children, hopes that
things will be different. But the most frequently cited reason for why they
they can leave in the first
place-— is financial hardship. The ability to maintain safe and stable
housing, to support their families, to manage the household finances: these
are all critical factors in the decision-making process. According to the
go back to the abuser—-or

why they don't feel

Allstate Foundation:

Research shows that lacking financial knowledge and resources are
the main reasons why victims of domestic violence return to or remain
in relationships with their abusers. This type of abuse called financial
aﬁects tens of thousands of women each year. (Allstate
Foundation, 2012)
Often, the economic barriers victims meet are what send them back to their
abusers, again and again.

abuse

-

I

can take years for someone to leave an abusive relationship, to say nothing of the
journey they then go on to establish a new life in which they are self-sufficient. Why
does it take so long? Because economic isolation and control are a key part of the
pattern of domestic abuse. Abusers frequently deny their victims the ability to work,
It

and experience, or to get the education that could give them more
options. They keep them from knowing about how to access or manage finances,
and they destroy their partners’ credit histories. always think of the woman I met
in my earliest days doing this work, who told me that before coming to the shelter,
her level of financial literacy was so low that the advocates had to teach her how to
write a check. She had never managed her own money before in her life, and was
starting over at square one, with two young children who depended on her and
none of the basic financial skills adults need to succeed.
to gain job skills

I

V

When we consider this proposal, we must consider the impact it will have on victims
of abuse, who not only depend on the social safety net for support when they are
most vulnerable, but who also may need that support for an extended period of
time. Maintaining separate eligibility timeframes around TAN F and GA makes sense
components have to be woven together to make
survival possible—if you take away one component then you jeopardize the entire
system's capacity to work for people. LD 368 would leave many victims with
literally no place within the safety net to turn. And when we make it more difficult
for victims to access the safety net they depend on to meet their and their children's
basic needs, we make it more likely that that victim will decide that there are no
for victims.

The

safety net's

options other than to live with the abuse. National research bears this out.

unconscionable to say that you want to support victims of abuse, and then give
them inadequate resources with which to work in their process of achieving safety
and self-sufficiency. If there is fraud in the system, then the system must deal
directly with that misuse. Let us not construct policy that attempts to deal with a
minority of cases, and in doing so cripples the efforts of so many of our most
It is

vulnerable neighbors as they seek

Thank you

for

your attention

safe,

sustainable

to this issue.

lives.

