Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OP MAINE WOMEN
Testimony of Danna Hayes

in Opposition to

Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and distinguished

LD 368

members of the

Joint Standing

Services. My name is Danna Hayes and I am the Director of
Women’s Lobby. We speak on behalf of Maine’s 678,000 women
I am here to oppose LD 368, but we also oppose other limitations to needy families’

Committee on Health and Human
Public Policy for the Maine

and

girls.

access to life-saving assistance.

We are very concerned about the effects this bill would have on struggling women and
their families.

TANF,
the 60

The vast majority of Mainers who use

are single

moms

month time

the

Temporary Aid

for

Needy Families,

or

supporting themselves and their children. After the implementation of

limit for use of TANF,

Maine Equal

and Sandra Butler, a
professor at University of Maine at Orono, surveyed families who were cut off from beneﬁts
after reaching the time limit. The most recent follow-up of these families shows some concerning
patterns. 40% of the people surveyed said that their families had no income after losing access to
TANF. The remaining participants reported that they brought in very little income- the median
income was $260 a month. Nearly 70% of those families reported having to go to a food bank or
food pantry, 35% had a utility shut off, 14% were evicted or lost their home and 9% stated that
‘
they were now homeless. This is especially concerning since all of these families necessarily
have children. Research has shown that when children experience extreme poverty in their early
years, they suffer from poorer educational outcomes, physical and mental health than their
Justice Partners

economically stable counterparts."

For families who have

lost access to

TANF

and are facing imminent

hunger, no heat in the wintertime, and homelessness, general assistance

disaster, including

is truly

the safety net of

These situations are exactly the kinds of dire circumstances the program is designed
mothers and their children into hunger or homeless does nothing to teach
them a lesson about personal responsibility. It does nothing to teach them how to get or maintain
a job. It does nothing to address the reasons they are struggling in the ﬁrst place. There are many
ways to truly help families out of poverty. Assistance with employment barriers, child care,
last resort.

to address. Forcing

transportation and education

through their

make

own efforts and

it

possible for families to leave public assistance permanently

well-targeted evidence-based supports. Simply removing any

opportunity for assistance in the most dire of emergencies just punishes

women

and their
children for needing and asking for help. We hope you will vote ought not to pass, and in
exchange, consider opportunities to create pathways out of poverty for Women and their families.

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330

0 207.622.0851 0 dhayes@mainewomen.org

wwW.mainewomen.org

Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OE MAINE
i

Butler, S.,

TANF

Time

limits

WOMEN

and Maine Families: Consequences of Withdrawing the Safety Net.

iittp://www.mejp.org/sites/default/ﬁles/TANKStudy-SButler-Feb20 13 .pdf

“

The Ejﬁzcts ofPoverty, Hunger and Homelessness on Children and Youth. American Psychological Association.

https://www.apa.org/pi/families/poveity.aspx?item=6

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330

¢ 207.622.0851 6 dhayes@mainew0men.org

www.mainewomen.o1"g

