Roman

Catholic Diocese of Portland

,//<§l;k@
‘;.-

,

*-,-.-»'-*\-

.-.;;%»l.-F-.-_'/

Q

Telephone: (207) 773-6471

510 Ocean Avenue

E4 s ,

A

Portland Maine 04103-4936

Facsimile: (207)

Suzanne

C. Lafreniere,

773-0182

JD

Office of Public Policy

A

Comments

of

Suzanne

Lafreniere,

on behalf of the Catholic Diocese

Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and members of the Joint Standing Committee on
Health and Human Services, my name is Suzanne Lafreniere and I represent the Roman Catholic

Diocese of Portland in expressing deep concern for the proposed proposal under consideration today.
The Diocese has a population of over 193,000 registered Catholics or one-seventh of the total population
of the state of Maine. In addition to its 141 churches organized into 55 parishes, it has 10 elementary
schools, one private elementary school, one diocesan high school and two private high schools. It also
includes one Catholic college, Saint Joseph's College of Maine in Standish.

Please reject

much

LDs

368, 369, 632, 722, 1035, 1036, IO37 and any proposal that would take

away

needed support to underprivileged families.

Throughout our nation’s history the Catholic Church has consistently welcomed and ministered
to immigrants. A Wonderful example is the story of the late eighteenth century Mission of Our Lady of
the Rosary Where vulnerable and poor young Irish women, arriving by ship in New York, were given
safe shelter and job training. Today, Catholic social service programs, schools, and parishes continue
that same outreach. In meeting immigrants face to face, the Catholic Church confronts ﬁrsthand the
pain and problems resulting from a broken immigration policy. We cannot stand by in silence and allow
budget decisions to hurt needy people.

Again

as

you know, general

assistance

is

by and large a refuge of last resort

for individuals

and

GA they are likely on the brink of

families in crisis. When they come
homelessness, facing hunger, or other similar catastrophic event. Where will they turn to
to their municipality to apply for

now?

Chances are they have already explored all other options and consequently they have no other place to
turn to. There is no doubt in my mind, nor should there be in yours, that many of these same people will
end up homeless and at the mercy of soup kitchens, adding yet additional numbers to what already are
unprecedented utilization of these resources. I can assure you that our churches are already doing all
that is humanly possible to meet the needs of those in need. We are stretched to our limit and it is
inconceivable that churches throughout the State could meet the increased demand that would result if
these bills are adopted.
All people have a right to live in freedom and lead productive lives free of persecution and
poverty, but

when that

isn’t possible, they have a right to migrate to other nations. Conversely,

obligation as a fundamentally prosperous nation to accept

it is

our

them graciously and welcome them among

us.

At this year’s World Day of Migrants and Refugees, Pope Francis reminded us, “The Lord says:
“I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you
welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you
came to me” (Mt 25:35-36). The mission of the Church, herself a pilgrim in the world and the Mother of
all, is thus to love Jesus Christ, to adore and love him, particularly in the poorest and most abandoned;
among these are certainly migrants and refugees, who are trying to escape difficult living conditions and
dangers of every kind.”

In his latest writing,
individual today

times

it

is

“The Joy of the Gospel”

our Holy Father, Pope Francis wrote, “The
two poles represented by the State and the marketplace. At
a producer and consumer of goods, or as an object of State

often suffocated between

seems as though he

exists only as

administration. People lose sight of the fact that life in society has neither the market nor the State as

ﬁnal purpose, since

What Pope

Francis

life itself
is

has a unique value which the State and the market must serve.” (#49).
is that each person is made in the image and likeness of God and as

reminding us

such deserves to be treated with respect and dignity.
Again,

I

ask you to please reject

proposal that would take

its

LDs

away much needed support

368, 369, 632, 722, 1035, 1036, 1037 and any
to underprivileged families.

Page 2 of 2

