Maine Women’s Lobby
WOMEN

THE VOICE OF MAINE
Testimony of Danna Hayes in Support of LD 1268
and in Opposition to LDs 452, 107%, 1144 and 1375.
ioa

Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and distinguished members of the Joint Standing

Committee on Health and Human Services. I am Danna Hayes, Director of Public Policy for the
Maine Women’s Lobby. We work to advance policies that improve the economic, social and
political status of Maine’s 678,000 women and girls. I am here today in support of LD 1268, and
opposition

LDs

452, 1079, 1144 and 1375.
4

The vast majority of the Mainers using the Temporary Aid for Needy Families program
are women. The program is only available to families with children. We know that a
majority of impoverished families with young children live in families headed by single

(TAN F)

mothers.‘ These are families

who

often struggle with multiple barriers to gainful employment,

including higher than average rates of domestic violence, lack of access to child care,
transportation, disability or lack of education.

Acknowledging these

difficult realities that

families trapped in poverty, the 125th legislature created a process through

which

keep

TANF

be thoroughly screened and connected with resources that can permanently
address ongoing barriers to work. Implementing an upfront work search requirement subverts

recipients can

this entire process,

would enable them
dissuade

many

assistance at

by forcing people to search for work before they can address limitations
to obtain and maintain employment. We suspect this requirement will

that

who know they cannot sustain employment from applying for
in many more being excluded from receiving the meaningful help

eligible recipients

all,

and will

result

with employment barriers that truly help people leave poverty.

We also must oppose limitations on use of beneﬁts to certain states. The presumption
behind this limitation

people in poverty should not be using their assistance for
vacations and enjoyment or that they do not truly live in Maine and therefore should not be
receiving this assistance. Like the rest of us, families in poverty occasionally have to visit other
states for reasons other than for ﬁin. They attend funerals, care for sick or aging family members,
is

that either that

or attend job interviews. If there

genuine concern that a family does not live in Maine because
their EBT cards are being used elsewhere for an extended period of time, the Department already
has the tools it needs to address this. Punishing others who have completely appropriate and
necessary reasons for using benefits for a short period of time in another state is the wrong way
is

any actual abuse and does nothing to move people out of poverty. In the same vein, we
on cash withdrawals, which can be used for rent, utility
child care and transportation transactions that do not take EBT cards. This dangerous

to target

are very concerned about limitations
bills,

proposal subverts the very reason the benefits are provided in the

l24 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

ME 04330

first

place,

which

is

to cover

0 207.622.0851 e dhayes@1nainewomen.org

www.mainewomen.org

2

Maine Women’s Lobby
THE VOICE OP MAINE

WOMEN

expenses such as these. Without widespread acceptance of EBT cards by private landlords, child
care providers and utility companies, among many others, it is clear that families would be
prohibited from using their beneﬁts to keep themselves aﬂoat.
Fortunately, we know what actually moves people off public assistance in a meaningful
and permanent way. LD 1268 addresses many of the issues that keep families trapped in poverty.
Removing the gross-income test and better addressing the efforts of two-parent households truly
rewards movement away from public assistance by easing a family off assistance instead of
pulling the rug out from under them just as they are getting back on their feet. We are also
thrilled about the consideration of the delays in receiving assistance with child care into the bill,

women, especially. The wait to obtain
approval for child care after getting a job offer often means either racking up incredible debt with
care providers because the beneﬁt does not apply retroactively, or it means passing up gainful
employment until funds are made available. Neither of these unintended outcomes serves our
shared goal of helping families move off of assistance and into self-sufficiency.

which we know

is

often a barrier to

On the whole, LD

employment

for

1268 presents an opportunity to reduce

TANF caseloads through

meaningful and purposeful support, whereas we believe the other bills we are discussing will
reduce caseloads through punitive measures without ever addressing the underlying causes of
poverty. In the end, it will be the children of these families who will suffer the most from the
effects

*

of the decisions made here.

U.S. Census Bureau, 2006-2010 American

124 Sewall

Street,

Augusta,

Community Survey

ME 04330

Q 207.622.0851 0 dhayes@mainewomen.org

www.mainewomen.org

