Testimony of the
Department of Health and Human Services
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and

LD
An Act to Ensure the Integrity

Human

Services

1144

of the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families Program

Sponsored by: Representative McCabe
Hearing Date: May 12,2015
Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine and

Members of the Joint Standing Committee on Health and Human
am Sam Adolphsen, Chief Operating Ofﬁcer in the Department of Health and Human Services
(DHHS). I am here today to speak in opposition of LD l 144, An Act to Ensure the Integrity of the Temporary
Services, I

Assistance for Needy Families Program.

LD

1144 prohibits the use of the electronic beneﬁts transfer system at tobacco specialty stores and
requires the
Department to develop an education program that emphasizes that beneﬁts are to be used for supporting
dependent children and not to be used for inappropriate purchases such as tobacco products. It
also

establishes

penalties for such use. Finally,

it

Department to collect information regarding the use of TANF
ﬁndings to the Legislature.

requires the

beneﬁts for prohibited uses and report

its

While the Department supports and encourages the strengthening of our public assistance
programs, LD 1144 is
redundant in some ways, and does not go far enough in others in the effort to deter the misuse
of public beneﬁts.

The Department has already taken many steps to educate recipients regarding the misuse of
Temporary Assistance
Needy Families (TANF) beneﬁts. This has been done through letters, TANF orientation, updated EBT

for

brochures, signed acknowledgement forms, changes to the pine tree card website, and updates
to the
identifying improper cash withdrawals at certain establishments. We have also blocked
the

ATM’s in establishments prohibited under current law.
Penalties for misuse as outlined in this bill are

TANF program.
offense,

Currently, recipients

two years

more

EBT card

use of EBT cards at

lenient then the penalties that are already established in the

who knowingly violate program

rules are penalized
for the second offense and permanently for the third offense.

one year for the ﬁrst

The Department cannot provide

details to the legislature about the hundreds of Intentional Program
Violations
([PV’s) and criminal welfare fraud cases each year because of conﬁdentiality information.
We can tell you there
were 228 [PV’s in 2014 and 147 in the ﬁrst quarter of 2015. In addition, there have been liundreds
of cases
referred to the Attomey General’s ofﬁce in the last two years, including
many cases for misuse of public beneﬁts.
There are many publicly available accounts of prosecuted welfare fraud cases.

While the Department supports increased accountability in our public welfare programs, LD 1144 does
not
implement adequate deterrents around the misuse of public beneﬁts. The Department does support
other
proposed initiatives relating to misuse of beneﬁts such as the Governor’s proposal and LD 1097
which aligns with
the Departments goals of reducing fraud, waste and abuse in our public welfare
programs.
I

would be happy to answer any questions you may have and would be glad
Work session.

questions at the

to

make myself available

for

