ACLU OF MAINE
121

MIDDLE STREET

SUITE 301
'

PORTLAND, ME 04101

;

AMERICAN
0| MAINE

CIVIL LIBERTIES

UNION

I207]

I

77451444

WWW.ACLUMA|NE.0RG

TESTIMONY OF OAMSHRI AMARASINGHAM, Esq.
LD
An Act to Require

1407

—

Ought Not To Pass

Screening and Testing for Illegal Substances of Beneﬁciaries under the

TANF

Program

JOINT STANDING COMMITTEE

ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

May
Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine, and
greetings.

18,

2015

members of the Committee on Health and Human Services,
and I am Public Policy Counsel for the American Civil

My name is Oamshri Amarasingham,

Union of Maine. On behalf our members, we oppose
questions and gives credence to harmful and false stereotypes.
Liberties

The ACLU of Maine has

LD

1407, which raises constitutional

consistently opposed the administration’s repeated efforts to force poor

Mainers to submit to suspicionless drug tests. We agree that Mainers are suffering ﬁom addiction, but
we cannot see how violating the constitutional rights of Mainers receiving TANF beneﬁts will stem this
public health crisis. Further, We have not seen any evidence that TANF recipients are more likely than
other Mainers to use illegal drugs. We also object to the section of LD 1407 that would deny beneﬁts to
anyone convicted of a drug-related felony — especially in light of Maine’s overly ptmitive drug laws.’

LD

1407

Is Constitutionally

Suspect and Proposes an Inappropriate Use of the SASSI Assessment

The Supreme Court of the United

by the Fourth
requires
Amendment
Fourth
limited
With
the
exception,
Amendment
at least individualized suspicion, if not probable cause, to justify a drug test. While LD 1407 would
require the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) to ﬁrst administer the Substance Abuse
States has long held that a drug test is a search protected

to the United States Constitution.

Subtle Screening Inventory (SASSI) assessment, we are skeptical that a certain score could constitute
even reasonable suspicion, let alone probable cause, required by the Fourth Amendment.

The Committee should be aware

SASSI Institute, the organization behind the screening
use of the SASSI assessment. In their position paper against

that the

instrument, speciﬁcally objects to this

these

kinds of bills, the Institute cites ethical and legal concerns in addiction to the constitutional deﬁciencies:

“The purpose of the SASSI is to help people who have substance use disorders. To use
the SASSI to discriminate against individuals, such as disqualifying job applicants or
to deny public assistance, violates the purpose of the SASSI and is a violation of the
Americans with

1

See, e.g.,
Z

SASSI

Disabilities Act.

"2

17-A M.R.S.A. § 1107-A (classifying simple possession of several drugs
“Screening Issues,” January l2, 2015. Emphasis in original.

Institute,

BE§ll\U‘;>l§ F?l%’EI{[)()i\4

[2/»\t~E'T

F‘%\’UIE(fi"§_ i‘!";§»El.,F

as a felony-level offense).

DHHS

In order to implement a policy of suspicionless drug testing,

(l) articulate “special

must

needs”

beyond the normal need for law enforcementf and (2) show that the special needs are “substantial,”
meaning “important enough to override the individual’s acknowledged privacy interest [and] vital to
suppress the Fourth Amendment’s normal requirement of individualized suspicion.”4

The proposed program fails to pass this stringent test. DHHS has not shown that drug abuse is a rampant
problem amongst Mainers who receive TANF beneﬁts. Even if DHHS could present evidence of a
problem, it is unclear why DHHS would need to skirt normal law enforcement procedures to address the
problem. The ACLU successfully sued the states of Floridas and Michigan6 over the constitutionality of
laws that made public beneﬁts contingent on passing a drug test. Both the Eleventh and Sixth Circuit
courts — two of the most conservative circuits in the country — agreed with us that such drug testing
programs violate the Fourth Amendment.7

LD

1407

LD

1407 appears to be based on the faulty assumption that cutting beneﬁts for an already marginalized

is

Fiscally Irresponsible

group of TANF applicants will save the

TANF

state

money.

It

will not.

temporary help for children and their parents while the family works toward becoming selfsupporting. For someone who is on the path to rehabilitation from prior drug use, a place to live, food to
eat, and support to gain employment are crucial to continued success. Without support systems like
TANF, families are likely to fall further into poverty, straining other state-based programs that are
is

Maine’s already over-burdened food pantries and homeless shelters will
have to ﬁll the gap, which they are unlikely to be able to do. The state will have to spend more money
on other programs to meet the need. There will be a ripple effect that hurts Maine ’s largest cities,
landlords, and hospitals. To suppose that making Maine’s poorest families poorer will beneﬁt the state’s
coffers deﬁes common sense.
already strapped for funding.

LD

1407 solves no problems, while creating a host of new issues. Chief among the proposal’s
deﬁciencies is the question of costs. Data from other states with similar drug testing programs has

shown

that these

'

3

Utah:

programs are a waste of taxpayer

From August 2013 through

dollars.

July 2014, Utah screened 4,786

TANF

applicants or recipients

v. Ry. Labor Executives ’Ass ’n, 489 U.S. 602, 619 (1989).
Chandler v. Miiler, 520 us. 305, 318 (1997).
5Lebron v. Secretary, Florida Dept. of Children and Families, 710 F.3d 1202 (2013).
6
Marchwinski v. Howard, 113 F. Supp. 2d 1134 (E.D. Mich. 2000), aff’d, 60 F. App’x 601 (6th Cir. 2003).
7
In February 2013, the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals struck down a Florida law requiring TANF applicants to submit
suspicionless drug tests.7 The enforcement of the law had previously been halted by a district judge within months of its

Skinner

“

to

going into effect as the result of a lawsuit brought by the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida. The appeals court
concluded that "[t]he simple act of seeking public assistance does not deprive a TANF applicant of the same constitutional
protection from unreasonable searches that all other citizens enjoy." In the unanimous decision, authored by Judge Rosemary
Barkett, the court held that not only had the lower court not overstepped

its

bounds

in issuing the injunction, but that the state

prove that there was any reason to treat poor families in Florida as any more likely to be drug users. "[T]here is
nothing inherent to the condition of being impoverished that supports the conclusion that there is a "concrete danger" that
impoverished individuals are prone to drug use," Barkett wrote for the court. In a concurring opinion, Judge Adalbeito Jordan

had

failed to

stated that, "[c]onstitutionally speaking, the state's position

Michigan drug
Fourth

testing

Amendment’s

program as unconstitutional, arguing

is

simply a bridge too far.” The ACLU challenged a similar
drug testing of welfare recipients violates the

that suspicionless

protection against unreasonable searches.

the Sixth Circuit upheld the lower court’s decision striking

The

down the

case,

Marchwinski

v.

Howard, concluded

policy as unconstitutional.

in

2003 when

and tested 454 individuals identiﬁed through screening. Of these, only 17 individuals tested
words 0.35% of those screened. Utah spent over $32,000 for testing and
screening of this period.

positive, in other

'

From March 2013 through October 2014, Missouri screened nearly 70,000 applicants
and identiﬁed 1,646 for testing. Of those, only 69 individuals tested positive, in other words less

Missouri:

than 0.1% of those screened.8

The

bill

provides that someone

treatment.

The

fails

a drug test

may

continue to receive beneﬁts if she enrolls in

on whether the recipient must bear the cost of treatment, or what the
no treatment programs are available.

bill is silent

recipient’s recourse

It

who

is if

bears repeating that under the current administration, funding for critical treatment programs has been

by 7%. Of the $1.4 billion
dollars that the state of Maine spends on the cost of drug and alcohol abuse, only 3.4% is spent on
treatment.9 Statewide, there are less than 200 beds available for substance abuse rehabilitation, which
less than 0.5% of the 4,800 people seeking treatment for opiate addiction in 2013 alone.”
severely cut. In 2013 alone, funding for drug treatment programs

LD

1407 Fosters Baseless and Ugly Stereotypes about

was

cut

is

TANF Recipients

LD

1407 turns core principles of American justice upside-down, requiring some TANF
by submitting to an unconstitutional drug test and permanently punishing
Mainers with past convictions. Our system of justice dictates that a past conviction is not an indication
of future bad conduct. Further, when someone does break the law, punishment is appropriately
determined by a court of law. And, once the sentence is served, the individual’s debt to society has been
Finally,

applicants to prove innocence

paid.

Not only does

LD

1407 seek to permanently punish someone who has already served her sentence,
It is patently unfair to deprive needy children of state assistance

this

seeks to punish her children.

bill

because of mistakes their parents made.

harm women in Maine. Women are the fastest growing
segment of the incarcerated population, and many are being put behind bars for nonviolent drug
offenses. Attached to my testimony is a fact sheet about women in prison that gives an overview of the
devastating and disparate impact of drug laws on women. It is important to note that the majority of
women in prison are mothers and most were the primary caretakers of their children prior to
If enacted, this bill will disproportionately

incarceration.

The proposed bill violates the constitution, relies on harmful stereotypes, and will only
destabilize Maine’s most vulnerable families. Please reject LD 1407.

8

9

Center on Budget and Policy
Eric Russell,

February 23, 2014.
‘°

Ia’

.

Priorities,

Drug Treatment Funding

“Drug
in

TANF,” January 2015.
Maine is Falling, but Demand is Greater

further

Testing in

than Even Portland Press Herald,

