Testimony of Holly Lusk
Senior Health Policy Advisor
Office of the Governor
Before the Joint Standing Committee on Health and

LD
An Act To Require

Human Services

1407

Screening and Testing for Illegal Substances of Beneﬁciaries under the Temporary
Assistance for

Needy Families Program

Sponsored by: Representative Sanderson
Hearing Date: May 18, 2015
Senator Brakey, Representative Gattine and

Members of the

Joint Standing

.

Committee on Health and

Human Services, my name is Holly Lusk and I serve as the Governor’s Senior Health Policy Advisor.
am here today to speak in support of LD 1407, An Act To Require Screening and Testing for Illegal
Substances of Beneﬁciaries under the Temporary Assistance for

I

Needy Families Program.

LD

1407 requires an adult applicant for or recipient of beneﬁts under the Temporary Assistance for
Needy Families (TANF) program to be screened and possibly tested for the unlawful use of drugs. The
bill also repeals provisions that prohibit the State’s denying food assistance and TANF assistance to a
person

who has been convicted of a drug~related felony.

_

LD

1407 recognizes the commonly-held belief that public ﬁnancial assistance should not be provided to
who have been convicted of serious drug crimes, and that taxpayer funds should not be spent
on drugs. The long-term viability of any program of public assistance depends on the broad support of the
body politic. The taxpayers of the States do not begrudge providing TANF or food beneﬁts for the family
individuals

whose breadwirmer has lost their job, or become disabled, or has otherwise suffered ﬁnancial disaster
through no fault of their own——these misfortunes can happen to anyone. But for individuals who have
chosen to engage in criminal behavior involving drugs—most typically drug trafﬁcking—there

is

no

parallel public support for the disposition of public resources.

Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
of 1996 (PRWORA). Part of that legislation prohibited individuals who had been convicted of drug
felonies from obtaining TANF and SNAP beneﬁts. Maine has not, until now, aligned its rules to that
standard. This proposal would synchronize Maine standards with federal rules. This proposal allows the
Department to conform its practices to federal law, and to implement a practical solution to prevent public
In 1996, the U.S. Congress passed the Personal Responsibility and

assistance monies

This

LD

from being allocated

to convicted

also establishes the requirement that adult

that is designed to determine the likelihood

screening

is

currently being

done for adult

drug

traffickers.

TANF

S

applicants and recipients submit to a screening

of the individual having a substance use disorder.

TANF

recipients

who

This

have been convicted of a drug-related

felony.

Substance abuse

is

a very real problem here in Maine. This

getting parents to seek treatment that will assist

The Department believes

them

in

bill

helps protect our vulnerable children by

overcoming addiction.

that adoption of this bill will serve the purpose of sending a

message of

condemnation of drug felonies, the importance of treatment to overcome addiction, and will provide
assurance to the taxpayers of the State of Maine that their hard-eamed money will not reward
reprehensible personal behavior.

glad to

make myself available

I

would be happy to answer any questions you may have and would be
work session.

for questions at the

