Testimony in Support of House Bill 2106
Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Committee Members:
I am Erick Vaughn, Director of Strategic Initiatives for DCCCA, Inc. DCCCA
has been serving Kansans for over forty years, coordinating substance abuse
prevention and treatment services; recruitment, training and support of
foster homes; traffic safety education and resources; and facilitating
residential and community based interventions for at risk youth and families.
All DCCCA services and administrative operations have been nationally
accredited by the Council on Accreditation since 2011. We enthusiastically
support HB 2106, offering deemed status for organizations like ours that are
both licensed by the State of Kansas and nationally accredited. This
legislation reduces unnecessary administrative costs for DCCCA and the
Kansas Department of Aging and Disability Services.
The Council on Accreditation (COA) is an international, independent
accrediting body founded in 1977. Their national standards for private
organizations enhance organization growth and stability, and ensure an
unwavering commitment to the health, safety, and rights of clients, and
produce high quality, measurable results.
DCCCA’s six substance use disorder treatment programs are licensed by the
Kansas Department of Aging and Disability Services. In 2016, we served over
2,700 Kansans. As an accredited organization, our facilities are held to
standards more rigorous than those required by KDADS. We must not only
say we provide safe, supportive and quality care, we must be able to provide
evidence that we implement that care on a daily basis. COA requirements are
divided into three sections, each containing multiple compliance elements:
 Administration and Management – standards guiding ethical practice;
financial management; governance; human resources; performance
and quality improvement; risk prevention and management.
 Service Delivery Administration – standards guiding facility safety and
security; health and wellness; client rights and confidentiality;
behavior management; medication control; employee training and
supervision.
 Services for Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders; Residential
Treatment Facilities – standards guiding evidenced based practices;
assessment, treatment planning, discharge and aftercare; facility

safety, security and therapeutic environment; staff credentials and
client ratios.
DCCCA accreditation further involves processes for reviewing critical
incidences, addressing client and public complaints, stakeholder feedback,
establishing and reporting service goals, and continually using data to
enhance quality care. Our partners, funders, clients and the general public
have access to COA standards at any time at www.coanet.org.
The Council on Accreditation awarded DCCCA the Highest Standards of
Professional Practice in 2011 and again with reaccreditation in 2015.
Passage of HB 2106 ensures we will maintain our level of excellence not only
as an accredited organization, but as licensed treatment facilities. We will
continue to report our adherence to national standards to our State partners
while redirecting redundant administrative and financial resources currently
allocated to duplicative licensing audits, to client services and staff support.
We will continue to abide by state licensing standards and verify that
compliance through our accreditation reporting.
Thank you in advance for your consideration and I am available to answer
questions.
Erick Vaughn, LMSW
Director of Strategic Initiatives
DCCCA, Inc.
evaughn@dccca.org
785-841-4138

