Testimony to House Health and Human Services Committee
House Bill 2106
February 1, 2017
Mister Chairman and Members of the Committee, I am Les Sperling, CEO of the Central
Kansas Foundation (CKF) based in Salina, Kansas. Our organization has been providing
quality and affordable Substance Use Disorder Prevention and Treatment services to the
citizens of Kansas for the last 50 years.
Ten years ago, CKF began our pursuit of national accreditation from the Commission on
Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities (CARF). Our purpose for pursuing
accreditation was twofold. First and foremost, we were searching for a formal platform
and processes that would create an organizational culture which constantly monitored the
quality and effectiveness of our services, and also provided a vehicle to ensure a daily
organizational focus on improving the quality and outcomes of those services.
In order to meet national accreditation standards, providers must address a series of
specific standards addressing leadership, governance, strategic planning, risk
management, health and safety, human resources, accessibility, performance
measurement and management, performance improvement, and others. Meeting the
accreditation standards goes far and above the Kansas Department of Aging and
Disability Services (KDADS) licensing standards, which are purposefully designed to
identify the minimum standards necessary to operate a safe and credible treatment
program.
CKF has completed and sent KDADS an exhaustive crosswalk comparison of our CARF
standards and the KDADS program licensing standards. As expected, all of KDADS
licensing standards are included in the CARF standards. Redundant licensing and
accreditation visits consume the valuable resources of all stakeholders that could be better
utilized in other important work.
Many Substance Use Disorder programs in Kansas have achieved national accreditation
and actively seek to improve their programs and services. Acknowledging this
achievement and commitment to quality via a deemed status is good for the providers,
state agencies, and most importantly, for those in need of our services. CKF stands in
full support of HB 2106.
In closing, I would like to mention our second reason for pursuing national accreditation.
Over the years, the burden of payment for Substance Use Disorder services has steadily
moved from the private insurance payers to the tax payers. Most health insurance
companies require a behavioral health provider to be nationally accredited in order to join
their provider panel. Kansas providers who pursue accreditation are making a conscious
effort to expand their capacity to obtain reimbursement for those individuals who receive
their services and are covered by a private health insurance plan. Through our CARF

accreditation, CKF is now on the provider panel of every commercial insurance company
doing business in Kansas. As more providers take advantage of deemed status promoted
by this bill, commercial insurance companies will continue to contribute to the benefits of
substance use disorder treatment. Thank you for opportunity to participate today and I
am happy to stand for any questions you may have.
Les Sperling
CEO

