!

Testimony for House Bill 2107
House Health and Human Services Committee
By Jody Reel, PharmD
Kansas Pharmacists Association, Topeka Kansas
January 23rd, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
My name is Dr. Jody Reel, and I am a Kansas pharmacy owner and Chair of Government Affairs /Board
Director for the Kansas Pharmacists Association. The Kansas Pharmacists Association is the statewide
professional association in Kansas that represents Kansas pharmacists from all practice settings. Thank you for
allowing me to testify on behalf of KPhA in opposition of House Bill 2107--Inclusion of Biological Products in
the Pharmacy Act of the State of Kansas.
The language regarding the "presumed communication" for the prescriber in Subsection H on page 19 is
disconcerting. Having a communication that is presumed will result in a lack of communication. Most of the
options for creating this communication are not accessible to the prescribers. This lack of communication may
result in professional tension between pharmacists and prescribers. Certain groups will interprete the language
to mean that a communication will be sent to prescriber. If this were the case, it would create a substantial
burden on both pharmacies and providers.
The communication to the physician after dispensing has the potential to create profession tension, since the
medication cannot be changed after it is dispensed. If the prescriber does not want the biosimilar dispensed,
then the branded medication would have be dispensed, causing an enormous waste in unused medication. This
will significantly increase the cost of healthcare for patients, payers, and the State of Kansas.
While most biosimilars are currently dispensed at specialty pharmacies, this bill will affect every pharmacy in
the near future. Primarily, biosimilars will be available for commonly used medications, such as insulin. Most
medications in the pipeline are biological and will be the future of pharmacy.
Most importantly, a precedent has been set with the availability of generic medications. If a prescriber does not
want a pharmacist to substitute, then the option to "Dispense As Written" is selected. This should be applied to
biosimilar products that are determined as interchangeable, just as it is applied to generic medications now.
Utilizing this process would prevent any miscommunication between pharmacists and prescribers.
Thank you for your consideration on House Bill 2107--Inclusion of Biological Products in the Pharmacy Act of
the State of Kansas. While language regarding biosimilars is important to have in Kansas, this language creates
miscommunication due to its vagueness.

!
Jody K. Reel, PharmD

Chair, Government Affairs
District 2 Board Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association

