800 SW Jackson St., Suite 1414
Topeka, KS 66612
Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary

Board of Pharmacy

phone: 785-296-4056
fax: 785-296-8420
pharmacy@ks.gov
www.kansas.gov/pharmacy
Sam Brownback, Governor

Testimony concerning HB 2071
House Committee on Health and Human Services
Presented by Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary
On behalf of
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy
January 24, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy testifies as an opponent of HB 2107. The Board has carefully
reviewed these amendments and additions over the past several months and generally supports
incorporating biological products and the laws governing biosimilar and interchangeable products in
Kansas. However, the Board cannot support some of the language proposed in HB 2107.
According to the FDA, a generic drug is bioequivalent to a brand name drug in dosage form, safety,
strength, route of administration, quality, performance characteristics and intended use. Even though
generic drugs are chemically identical, they are often utilized due to their price tag. This is the easiest
comparison for a biological product, which is made from living organisms, such as proteins, instead of
chemical compounding or synthesis. According to the FDA, there are two new types of biological
products, known as biosimilars and interchangeable products. Biosimilars are FDA-approved biological
products that are highly similar to another FDA-approved biological product, and have no clinically
meaningful difference. An interchangeable biological product, in addition to meeting the biosimilarity
standard, is expected to produce the same clinical result in a patient.
The Board opposes HB 2107 primarily because of the requirement that pharmacists report the
substitution to the prescriber. Kansas already has a model for substituting prescription drugs deemed
equivalent by the FDA and it has worked well for many years. Unless a prescriber expressly prohibits it,
a Kansas pharmacist may exercise an exchange as long as the patient is informed and a record is kept in
the pharmacy for five years. The requirements proposed for exchange of a biological product, however,
require patient notification, a pharmacy record, and the additional step of reporting the exchange to the
prescriber within five business days (see page 19, new subsection (h)). This extra step may seem
inconsequential, but the Board of Pharmacy believes it places a significant and unnecessary burden on
pharmacists. First, it makes the rules for exchange inconsistent for pharmaceutical drugs and biological
products. Second, it imposes a duty to communicate back to the prescriber, which takes time and
attention away from patient-centered practice and otherwise seems to lack purpose. Third, it creates a
redundancy in record-keeping and communication. And last, no reasons have been provided to the
Board of Pharmacy concerning why the communication is important, why the prescriber wants it to
occur, or what is achieved by this extra requirement.
It may be argued that there aren’t currently many opportunities for exchange of biological products and
so this burden would be minimal. While that may be true right now, the pharmacy community
anticipates this is just the beginning of the biosimilars and interchangeables that will be available in
coming years. Imagine if a similar requirement existed for generic substitutions, which are done by the

thousands at a pharmacy each day – some exchanges are even required for a patient to receive full
insurance coverage or benefits. The number of emails, faxes, and phone calls to the prescribers would be
overwhelming for both the pharmacies sending and the prescribers receiving such communications.
It has also been suggested that this presumption of communication via an interoperable electronic
medical records system minimizes the impact of the reporting requirement. This is certainly a model that
would be applicable in a hospital health system or, perhaps, a major metropolitan pharmacy, but it is not
the model used in the rural or community pharmacy setting. Therefore, the impact would most heavily
be felt in independent pharmacies that do not maintain integrated electronic records systems, creating
create quite a disparity between pharmacies.
For the aforementioned reasons, the Board of Pharmacy opposes the adoption of HB 2107. If the
reporting requirement was removed, the Board would support the bill.

