January 23, 2017
Members, House Health and Human Services Committee
Kansas House of Representatives
Kansas State Capitol
300 SW 10th Street
Topeka, Kansas 66612
RE: Support for HB 2107 -- Inclusion of biological products in the pharmacy act of the state of Kansas
Dear Representative:
The Alliance of Specialty Medicine (Alliance) is a coalition of national medical specialty societies
representing more than 100,000 physicians and surgeons. We are dedicated to the development of sound
health care policy that fosters patient access to the highest quality specialty care. The undersigned
member organizations of the Alliance of Specialty Medicine write in support of House Bill 2107 regarding
the dispensing of interchangeable biosimilar products.
The Alliance has closely followed the development of federal and state policy related to biosimilars and
the safety considerations that should be taken into account as more biosimilar versions of existing biologic
medicines become a new treatment option for our patients. Importantly, HB 2107 addresses key policy
issues to ensure patient safety is preserved, including physician authority to prevent substitutions and
ensuring that the treating physician is notified if another version of the biologic medicine is substituted
for the version prescribed by the doctor.
Specifically, we appreciate that HB 2107 does not allow for biosimilar substitution if the prescriber
indicates that the script shall be dispensed as written. (p. 17, lines 25-33)
Also, we support that the bill requires notifying the prescribing practitioner of substitution “Within five
business days following the dispensing of a biological product….” (p. 19, lines 8-17)
The practice of automatic substitution that is seen with generic drugs is not entirely appropriate for
biosimilar products given that they are not simply “generic” versions of biologics. Physicians need to know
what medicine their patient receives and therefore, the prescribing physician should be notified whenever
a patient’s biologic medicine is substituted. This will help to ensure the accuracy of patient medical
records and identify any issues should there be an adverse event.

January 23, 2017
HB 2107 -- Inclusion of biological products in the pharmacy act of the state of Kansas
Page 2

Advances in medical treatment have transformed the way we fight certain diseases. Biologics, and
biosimilars, will continue to be an important treatment option for patients. The Alliance of Specialty
Medicine appreciates that HB 2107 ensures appropriate safeguards and urges that you advance the bill.
Sincerely,
American Academy of Facial Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery
American Association of Neurological Surgeons
American College of Mohs Surgery
American Gastroenterological Association
American Society of Cataract and Refractive Surgery
American Society of Echocardiography
American Society of Plastic Surgeons
Coalition of State Rheumatology Organizations
Congress of Neurological Surgeons
North American Spine Society
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions

