Arthritis Foundation
1900 W. 75th St, Ste 200
Prairie Village, KS 66208

January 19, 2017
Chair Daniel Hawkins
Health and Human Services Committee
Topeka, KS
RE: HB 2107 – Support
Dear Chair Hawkins,
The Arthritis Foundation strongly encourages you to support HB 2107, which includes
provisions allowing for the substitution of biological medications. We are particularly
pleased that this bill includes provisions for prescriber communication.
The Arthritis Foundation is the Champion of Yes. Leading the fight for the arthritis
community, the Foundation helps conquer everyday battles through life-changing
information and resources, access to optimal care, advancements in science and
community connections. We work on behalf of over 497,000 Kansans (including 2,800
children) who live with the chronic pain of arthritis every day. We continue to raise
valuable funds to support research to find better treatments and a cure. We sincerely
hope that lending our support for HB 2107 will make a difference in the lives of the
people we serve. HB 2107 enhances patient access to new and potentially less costly
medication. More importantly, it will ensure that pharmacists are communicating critical
and up-to-date medical information to physicians.
With such complex treatment plans as those for chronic diseases, physicians must know
which medication their patient is taking in the event that any side effects occur. As
such, it is imperative that physicians and patients are aware of the specific biologic
dispensed. Not only will this communication maintain an accurate medical record, but
it will also allow physicians to closely monitor the care and progress of their patients.
We are proud to advocate on behalf of the over 497,000 men, women, and children
with arthritis – the number one cause of disability in the U.S. – and ask for your support
for HB 2107. Please contact me at mguadalupe@arthritis.org or (773-304-7290) with any
questions.
Sincerely

Michele Guadalupe, MPH, State Director of Advocacy and Access

