Testimony for House Bill 2030
House Health and Human Services Committee
By Jody Reel, PharmD
Kansas Pharmacists Association, Topeka Kansas
January 23rd, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
My name is Dr. Jody Reel, and I am a Kansas pharmacy owner and Chair of Government Affairs
/Board Director for the Kansas Pharmacists Association. The Kansas Pharmacists Association is
the statewide professional association in Kansas that represents Kansas pharmacists from all
practice settings. Thank you for allowing me to testify on behalf of the KPhA in support for
House Bill 2030--Pharmacist Administration of Vaccine to Children. This proposed change in
statute will increase access to immunizations, particularly immunizations for adolescents-Measles, Mumps, Rubella (MMR,) Human Papillomavirus Virus (HPV,) meningococcal, and
pertussis (whooping cough) vaccines. Increased access should result in higher immunization
rates. Kansas ranks 44th in the nation for overall adolescent immunization rates.
In February 2016, the CDC reported that Kansas ranked last in the nation for HPV vaccination
rates in the country. HVP is a virus that currently infects 80% of adults at some point in their
lives. It is responsible for warts on the skin, including genital warts, cancers including cervical,
vaginal, and throat (oropharyngeal.) HPV is responsible to 27,000 new cancer diagnoses every
year in the United States. This vaccine is the only vaccine available to prevent cancer.
Outbreaks of measles, mumps, meningitis, and pertussis have occurred nationwide and in the
Midwest. I've personally experienced pertussis outbreaks in Kansas, while having children too
young to be immunized. Living in an area with low immunization rates, we lack the protection of
herd immunity--having the majority immune from a disease to prevent its spread. Most notable
outbreaks in Kansas include:




Pertussis – 2014-2015 - 7 outbreaks with 331 ill spread across the eastern half of the state
(Reno, McPherson, Barton, Harvey, Marion, Pottawatomie, and Montgomery Counties)
Measles – 2014 – one outbreak with 14 cases, 10 of which would have been in the age
group affected by the bill
Mumps – 2006 – 546 cases across a wide age span, with a high level of impact on KU.
Happened in May and caused concern over graduation gatherings.

These immunizations are indicated for the minimum age of 9 to 10 years old, and the CDC
recommends that they are given together in children ages 11 and 12 years of age. By allowing
pharmacists to immunize these adolescents, we would be able to increase access and awareness
of immunizations. Nationwide, 26 states allow pharmacists to provide all immunizations

including neighboring states: Oklahoma, Nebraska, Colorado, and Missouri. Kansas is one of 17
states that have some restrictions for patients under 18 years of age.
Thank you for your consideration for House Bill 2030. If you have any questions or issues for
follow-up, I am available at (785) 285-1257.

Jody K. Reel, PharmD
Chair, Government Affairs
District 2 Board Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association

