Staci Penner, Newton KS, Biosimilar Testimony:

Patient Advocate for the Arthritis Foundation

Good afternoon Chair Hawkins and members of the House Health and Human Services Committee. My
name is Staci Penner. I live in Newton, Kansas, where I am an occupational therapist. I have experienced
the effects of arthritis personally and professionally. As an occupational therapist, I know the clinical
side of the disease. As a mother of a young girl diagnosed with polyarticular juvenile arthritis – and
myself being diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis – I know the personal battles and
struggles that come with the disease.
When my daughter, Laniese, was 9 years old, she was diagnosed with polyarticular arthritis. Our family
immediately sprang into action to ensure that Laniese would receive the medical care she needed so
that she could continue to play basketball, run cross country and participate in track. We travel 200
miles every five weeks for my daughter’s biological infusions. These biologics have been a lifesaver for
my daughter and many of the 2,800 children in Kansas who have juvenile arthritis.
Laniese definitely knows when it is time for another infusion – for about a week prior, she has increased
fatigue, inflammation and pain. Within 12-18 hours of the infusion, she is back to being able to keep up
with her peers and team mates!
There is a significant cost associated with biologics (in fact Laniese’s $6000 deductible is met in January),
but we feel very strongly that Laniese is thriving because of the biologic and are thankful that we have
health insurance.
Biosimilars and interchangeable biologics would lower these costs and make these treatments available
to more patients. A big concern of ours regarding biosimilars and interchangeable biologics is
communication between providers, pharmacies and patients. These medications are powerful and often
come with side effects and as with any drug have the potential of serious adverse effects.
In fact, for the first 3-8 hours after an infusion, Laniese is very fatigued, irritable and feels like she is in a
fog. This is just one example on why it is so important for doctors to be alerted about their patient’s
medication. They need to know about any potential side effects.
We have put our full trust in our physicians. We always discuss Laniese’s treatment plans at length prior
to making a final plan. What truly concerns us in regards to the interchangeable biologics is the chance
that the dispensing pharmacy is not required to notify the physician or the patient when an
interchangeable is used. If my daughter were to have a reaction, as her parent I would need/want to
know what med she had been given. There would be no way to track side effects and adverse events to
each particular biosimilar or interchangeable biologic if the patient and physician were unsure of what
medication was actually administered. This would undermine the relationship between the physician
and patient. This is why we fully support the passing of HB 2107 with the communication component
included.

