Testimony in support of House Bill 2107
Hilary Gee, Kansas Government Relations Director
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network

January 24, 2017

Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
The American Cancer Society Action Network (ACS CAN) appreciates the opportunity to comment on HB 2107,
which adds biologic products to the Kansas Pharmacy Act. ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy
affiliate of the American Cancer Society, supports evidence-based policy and legislative solutions designed to
eliminate cancer as a major health problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that are
helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in
public policy matters at all levels of government.
ACS CAN supports House Bill 2107. The development of biologic drugs has provided cancer patients and their
physicians with access to improved therapeutic options. As generics have done for small-molecule drugs,
interchangeable biosimilars have the potential to increase price competition on older biologic drugs, and
result in lower cost burdens for cancer patients. As it is written, this bill includes important protections to
ensure physicians and patients provide appropriate consent for substitution, appropriate records are kept, and
safety and interchangeability are ensured.
As biosimilar policies are developed, they must focus on ensuring the safety and efficacy of all biologic drugs,
whether innovator or biosimilar, and policies must also ensure access and affordability of biosimilars for cancer
patients. The FDA requires robust evidence proving sufficient equivalence in terms of safety and efficacy
between innovator biologics and those deemed as “interchangeable biosimilars.” Even so, biologics are
manufactured in living organisms, and are therefore much more complex than manufacturing pharmaceutical
generics. In addition, biosimilars are not exact replications of their reference biologic product and as such, a
patient’s response may be different to the substituted product. Given the complexity of treatments for cancer
patients, these minor differences could result in significant complications that would not be readily understood
if both the patient and prescriber are left uninformed of the biosimilar substitution. Dispensing a biosimilar
without the knowledge of the prescriber and patient could jeopardize patient safety in the event of an adverse
reaction.
By allowing safe and appropriate substitution with biosimilars, HB 2107 can increase price competition, thereby
lowering costs for cancer patients in our state.

American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network
1315 SW Arrowhead Rd Topeka, KS 66604
785.438.5616 | @KansasACSCAN

