January 22, 2017
Members
House Health and Human Services Committee
Kansas State Capitol
Topeka, Kansas 66612
(via electronic delivery)
Re: Kansas HB 2107 An Act relating to biological products
Dear Members:
On behalf of the Lupus and Allied Diseases Association and the millions of Kansas residents struggling to
manage autoimmune conditions like lupus and other diseases of unmet need who eagerly await access
to affordable, appropriate and safe therapies, I passionately urge you to support HB 2107. This landmark
legislation will update current state law regarding generic drug substitution to allow for the substitution
of biologic products with FDA approved interchangeable biologics. This statute will create a new
pathway for biologic substitution where none currently exists in Kansas, while at the same time
enhancing patient access to new and potentially less costly medications.
The Lupus and Allied Diseases Association, Inc., is a passion driven, all-volunteer patient advocacy
organization dedicated to improving quality of life for those impacted by lupus and allied diseases and
conditions of unmet need by fostering collaboration among all stakeholders and promoting innovative
advocacy, awareness and biomedical research program initiatives.
As patient stakeholders who represent patients and loved ones dealing with serious chronic medical
conditions on a daily basis, we support HB 2107 as it promotes patient safety and collaboration among
all members of the patient’s health care team by facilitating consumer knowledge and communication
between pharmacists and prescribing physicians when biosimilars designated as “interchangeable” are
substituted for a prescribed biologic. It also gives the pharmacist authorization to select an alternative
biological product if it is interchangeable and the prescriber does not indicate an intent to prevent
substitution.
Furthermore, the proposed legislation ensures that the treating physician is aware of the exact biologic,
indicated by manufacturer, given to a patient in order to facilitate patient care and accurate attribution
of any adverse events that may occur. Pharmacist-Prescriber communication is paramount in identifying
exactly which medicine was received if an adverse event occurs since biologics and biosimilars in reality
will be administered to patients suffering from serious, life-threatening diseases who usually take
several concomitant medications and are not participating in a controlled clinical study.

Unlike small molecules, biologics are extremely complex large molecules patterned after human tissue
and cells that have the ability to target the underlying cause of some diseases. They have advanced with
each generation; evolving from proteins that are naturally-occurring to monoclonal, and eventually to
polyclonal and fusion proteins. Biosimilar drugs hold tremendous promise and therapeutic advantages
for lupus and autoimmune patients just as biologic medicines have for millions of individuals living with
life-threatening and life-diminishing diseases. As more biosimilars become available in the United States
we want to ensure they are safe, efficacious, accessible, and affordable. We must remain vigilant in
protecting patient safety while promoting unfettered access to vital and effective treatments.
HB 2107 outlines the parameters for substitution of interchangeable biologics, guaranteeing patients
have access to high quality, safe, and efficacious biologic medicines. Substitution should only occur
when the FDA has designated a biologic product as interchangeable and proper patient protections are
upheld including Pharmacist-Patient communication to ensure complete transparency. PharmacistPrescriber communication regarding the dispensed product must occur within five business days and be
conveyed by making an entry that can be electronically accessed by the prescriber. Communicating
through an electronic-record keeping system guarantees that the patient has a longitudinal health
record and given that many patients have comorbidities requiring treatment by multiple health care
providers, an accurate medical record is essential.
For the above reasons we ask you to please facilitate communication between patients, pharmacists,
and healthcare providers and join the 26 other states that have passed similar legislation by supporting
HB 2107. This legislation is especially important given that the FDA has already approved four
biosimilars with additional products in the pipeline. It is imperative that these safeguards are put in
place to ensure that healthcare professionals continue to be empowered to provide the best medical
care possible and that patients have access to lifesaving and life-enhancing therapies.
Please feel free to contact me at 315-264-9101 if you have any questions. Thank you.
Sincerely-

Kathleen A. Arntsen
President/CEO

· PO Box 170 Verona, NY 13478 · 315-829-4272 · www.NoLupus.org · LupusInnovators@aol.com ·

