	  
January 23, 2017
Kansas House of Representatives
Health and Human Services Committee
Kansas State Capitol
Dear Members of the House Health and Human Services Committee,
As the chairman and advisory board chair of the Alliance for Safe Biologic Medicines (ASBM), we are
writing to urge you to support House Bill 2107 (HB 2107) regarding the pharmacy substitution of
biosimilar medical products. ASBM is an organization of patients, physicians, pharmacists, manufacturers
of both innovative and biosimilar medicines, researchers and others who are working together to ensure
patient safety is at the forefront of the biosimilars policy discussion.
As a retired pediatric rheumatologist and a former president of the American Society of Health-system
Pharmacists, we are keenly aware of the benefits of biologics in treating serious conditions like cancer,
rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes, and MS. “Copies” of these medicines, called “biosimilars” have the potential
to provide these therapies at reduced cost. Yet unlike generic versions of chemical drugs biosimilars are not
exact duplicates of their reference products. Indeed, the complexity of biologics and their proprietary
manufacturing processes mean that these “copies” can only ever be similar, never the same. Even the
smallest structural difference between a biologic and its attempted copy can have a significant impact on a
patient, including reduced efficacy or unwanted immune responses.
We believe that when interchangeable biosimilar products are substituted, communication between
patients, pharmacists, and health care providers is essential to patient care. We fully support HB 2107 and
are concerned that patient safety will be compromised if this legislation is not enacted.
Since 2012, ASBM has conducted surveys of physicians in eleven countries, to gather their perspectives on
biosimilars. The results of these surveys have since been shared with policymakers in the U.S., Canada,
Europe, and the World Health Organization in Geneva, Switzerland.
Our survey of 376 U.S. physicians found that 80% of those surveyed called communication
in the event of a biosimilar substitution “very important” or “critical”.
Further, 82% of U.S. physicians called the authority to block a substitution by indicating
“do not substitute” or “dispense as written” on a prescription “very important” or
“critical”.
These results are consistent with those of physicians around the world, including those surveyed in Canada
and Europe, where biosimilars are currently in clinical use. All ASBM surveys are available on our
website at www.safebiologics.org.
It is our view that HB 2107 appropriately reflects the importance of pharmacist-physician
communication and keeping treatment decisions the purview of the physician and patient, without posing
undue or onerous burdens upon the pharmacist:
It provides that only “interchangeable” biosimilars (those determined by the FDA to produce the
same effects in a patient as the reference product without additional risks) may ever be
substituted.
It allows a physician to prevent a substitution they consider inappropriate for their patient by
writing on the prescription “dispense as written”.

	  
The	  Alliance	  for	  Safe	  Biologic	  Medicines	  -­‐	  PO	  Box	  3691	  Arlington,	  VA	  22203	  –	  www.safebiologics.org	  -­‐	  (703)	  971-­‐1700	  
	  

	  

It provides that the pharmacist inform the patient or the patient’s representative that a substitution
has occurred.
Finally, HB 2107 requires that the pharmacist communicate to the physician within a reasonable
time frame (5 days) which biologic the patient actually received – whether that prescribed by the
physician, or a substituted biosimilar- so that an accurate patient record can be kept by all parties.
For these reasons, lawmakers in 26 states and Puerto Rico have passed similar bills in the past few
years. HB 2107 will extend these valuable protections to Kansas’s patients while increasing their access to
biologic therapies.
Thank you in advance for taking the necessary steps to keep patient safety a priority in Kansas by
supporting House Bill 2107.

Sincerely,

Harry Gewanter, MD
Chairman, The Alliance for Safe Biologic Medicines

Philip J. Schneider, MS, FASHP
Advisory Board Chair, Alliance for Safe Biologic Medicines
Associate Dean, University of Arizona College of Pharmacy

ASBM Steering Committee Members:
Alliance for Patient Access
American Academy of Dermatology
American Autoimmune Related Diseases Association (AARDA)
Association of Clinical Research Organizations
Colon Cancer Alliance
Global Colon Cancer Association
Global Healthy Living Foundation
Health HIV
Hepatitis Foundation International
International Cancer Advocacy Network
Kidney Cancer Association
National Psoriasis Foundation
ZeroCancer

	  
The	  Alliance	  for	  Safe	  Biologic	  Medicines	  -­‐	  PO	  Box	  3691	  Arlington,	  VA	  22203	  –	  www.safebiologics.org	  -­‐	  (703)	  971-­‐1700	  
	  
	  

