Testimony re: HB 2030
House Health & Human Services Committee
Presented by Michael Smith, Regional Director, Walgreens
January 23, 2017
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee, my name is Michael Smith representing
Walgreens.
With 72 store locations and more than 2,000 Kansas employees, Walgreens is proud to
serve communities throughout the state. On behalf of Walgreens, I am writing in
support of HB 2030 to expand pharmacist-administered immunizations.
Members of the Committee, as you know current law allows pharmacists to administer,
without a prescription, the flu vaccine to patients age six and above, and all other
vaccinations to patients 18 years of age and above. House Bill 2030 would simply
allow pharmacists to administer all vaccinations without a prescription to patients age
six and above.
This legislation is important because it will increase access and convenience for this
population to immunizations. Under this legislation, younger Kansans can receive
immunizations at pharmacies during convenient times and locations that fit their
families’ busy lifestyles, without an appointment, while maintaining the critical
relationship with a primary care physician. With increased access to vaccinations,
families can have their children receive routine vaccinations during evenings and
weekends without an appointment.
Pharmacists are trained and qualified to administer vaccinations to this population
today. Broad public acceptance of community pharmacists not only creates better
access but also facilitates additional health care touch points, which ultimately results in
better health outcome.
Although a majority of individuals who receive immunizations have a primary care
physician, many do not. A pharmacy can play an integral role in those individuals’
healthcare, and ultimately help bring them into the broader healthcare system, which
may include establishing a primary care physician.
Walgreens pharmacists are trusted and trained professionals who are qualified to
administer all vaccinations to patients age seven and above. Kansas families and their
children ought to have as accessible, convenient and affordable vaccinations as
possible.
Thank you and I respectfully ask you to support HB 2030.

