Marysville Dental Care, 1200 Broadway, Marysville, Kansas 66508
785-562-5529 MarysvilleDentalCare.com
Date: February 1, 2017
To:

House Committee on Health and Human Services

From: Dr. David Hamel, DDS
RE:

1. Support for HB 2119 - clarifying that de minimis coverage and exhausted coverage do
not qualify as covered dental services.
2. Offering an amendment to remove vague language.

Good Afternoon Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee,
I am David Hamel DDS, a general dentist of in Marysville, KS and current Chair of the Kansas Dental
Association Council on Dental Benefit Programs. I am also a member of the American Dental
Association Council on Dental Benefit Programs.

During my 40 years of practice, I’ve been an advocate for my patients’ oral health first, and
additionally as an advocate for them in what seems like their constant battle to receive the
decreasing benefits that are available to them under their dental benefit plans. Even
transparency for them is impossible to see in their plan. Most people do not know what is or is
not covered and they are always asking for their dentist’s help. Insurance confusion probably
interferes with more dentist to patient relationships than any one other thing.
One effort to create more transparency and clarity was through previous legislation KSA 402,185, regarding non-covered services. That bill reads: “No contract issued or renewed after
July 1, 2010, between a health insurer and a dentist who is a participating provider with respect
to such health insurer's health benefit plan shall contain any provision which requires the dentist
who provides any service to an insured under such health benefit plan at a fee set or prescribed
by the health insurer unless such service is a covered service”.
The intent of that bill, was to clarify and provide transparency to what is and is not covered. It
would give consumers a clear understanding of their benefits when services of the patient’s
choice were selected as treatments. The intent of this non-covered services bill seemed clear,
until it was not.
The general public, knows what “non-covered” means in reality. They define it as no payment
or reimbursement equals no coverage. Even with that understanding the non-covered services
bill allowed some defined limitations to be in place. These limits apparently were not well
enough defined as nationally there has been a trend to circumvent the intent of these bills.
There are over 40 states with non-covered services in place and there is a growing issue with
services being classified as “disallowed” as well as de minimis amounts being paid then claiming
the service was “covered”. (I did bring a copy of a processing policy with me as an example of
the denials and disallows that are being imposed on so-called “covered” services.)

The clause in the current bill KSA 40-2, 185 which is being used as a basis for these changes is
the subject of my proposed amendment. I’d like to offer up the amendment to HB 2119 to
strike the clause, in line 11 of the bill which states: “or other contractual limitation contained in
the health benefit plan.” Removing this clause has already occurred in other states and will
remove vague, undefined language from the statute which may again be used to circumvent
the intent of this law.
I fully support, the remainder of the bill with the clarifications on limitations including the
yearly maximum clarification of non-covered. $1,000 dental benefit plans originated about
1952. 95% of plans are equal to or not much more than that now. Since then, a natural,
reduction in real dollars has lowered dental benefits just due to inflation. In about 1954, 3rd
party administrators appeared. They grew larger and larger while enjoying some government
protections on their business. What happened thus is that in addition to natural devaluing of
benefits from inflation, over the years 3rd parties changed focuses and imposed more and more
restrictions, so there are less and less benefits paid out per premium dollar funding those
benefits. That continues today with changes in business models and shifting of expenses to
other consumers or contracted dentists. Everything has increased the cost of business and
administration for dental offices and pushed more costs onto consumers.
I’m sure you will hear insurance representatives will use the claim of “higher costs” to oppose
any change. But I’d have a hard time understanding why?
First, it is not a mandate to do anything more than clarify definitions of what is a covered
service.
Secondly, there is already a diminishing value to consumers for dental benefit plans even in the
face of a perceived high desirability for them. Including yearly limits in the non-covered
services, would encourage plans to increase their yearly limit giving consumers a potential
greater value. Remember, people pay a lot of money to prefund their benefit plans.
Nationally, the numbers are showing that most dental plans cost more than dentistry. That is
like being upside down on your house by owing more than it is worth.
Finally, I offer you this consumer written perspective on dental insurance to shine some light
and levity while being very accurate in his description.

Gene Weingarten: Let’s get to the root of
AARP’s (ANY) dental insurance
June 16 at 9:00 AM Washington Post.

Like most of you, I have health insurance. Like most of you, my health insurance says it
covers dental work. As with most of you, this is basically a fiction. Insurance companies
are famously stingy at the dentist.
Whenever I leave my dentist’s office, he and I follow a ritual. He solemnly informs me
he will first bill my insurer, and I agree that would indeed be prudent. Then, about six
weeks later, I get a letter notifying me that my insurance company has completely paid
for all but $328 of my $341 bill.
So you can imagine my excitement when I recently got a letter from AARP, informing
me it has a dental plan for which I qualify, as a new member in good standing.
(I resisted joining AARP for years, for the same reason everyone resists, which is that
even though AARP ads feature photos of “seniors” of a certain physical type — think
Paul Newman and Sophia Loren — deep down, when most of us think of AARP, we think
of Grandpappy Ned, who sometimes forgets to close the bathroom door. I am ashamed
to admit I finally gave in and joined only after AARP offered a free tote bag. In my mind
it was going to be made of supple leather, the sort of tote bag Paul and Sophia would
take to the spa in Cannes; what arrived in the mail had the dimensions of a tote bag but
appeared to be made of cellophane. True fact: I stepped on a bathroom scale, then
picked up the tote bag, and the needle did not stir.)
Anyway, could it be that the sheer size of AARP — its numbers are mighty — has cut
through the insurance companies’ tooth parsimony? I sent away for the dental plan, and
AARP emailed it to me. It was customized under my name! At the end was an
enrollment form, and it was already filled in with my name and address. They make it
so easy for a senior to sign on. But first I had some questions.
Me: Hi. I’m afraid this plan is not for me.
AARP Lady: Okay.
Me: I can’t see how it is for anyone. Is anyone actually enrolled in this?
AARP Lady: It’s a very popular choice!

Me: Okay, the premium is $72.20 a month, which comes out to $865.20 a year. And
there is a yearly deductible of $50, so I’ll basically start out paying $915 a year.
AARP Lady: Okay.
Me: Most years, I don’t pay anywhere near that much for dental care, except for the
occasional year when I have real problems and need a root canal and crown, which can
cost close to $4,000. So I’m thinking this is where the stiff monthly premiums pay off,
when my insurance company rides in and rescues all us wrinklies, shouldering our deep
financial burdens, taking on our risks, enveloping us in the warm bosom of its
protection. Except ... at best you pay less than half of my bill for a root canal and crown.
AARP Lady: That’s typical for the industry.
Me: Noted. But that’s not the really bad thing, which is this: You have a $1,500 yearly
cap on what you will pay me. For anything, and everything. So for my $915, you are
promising to bear risks in any given year all the way up to a theoretical grand total of
$1,500, which works out to a net risk to you, tops, of $480. If my dental bills exceed that
by $5,000, that’s my burden. Now, to be fair, I do notice you also cover, separately,
tooth-shattering traffic accidents and such, which could be huge — jaws rebuilt, and
whatnot.
AARP Lady: That’s a complimentary benefit, but only if you pay in advance for the
whole year.
Me: So I see. But that’s not my real problem. “Accident” coverage maxes out at
$1,000 for your entire lifetime. Second accident? It’s on you. AARP Lady, who buys this
policy?
AARP Lady:
Me: I’m thinking Grandpappy Ned.
Thank-you for allowing me to testify in support of HB 2119 and offer an amendment to help further
clarify it.
David Hamel DDS

