Date:

February 1, 2017

To:

House Committee on Health and Human Services

From: Dr. Nick Rogers, President Elect Kansas Dental Association and Practicing Dentist in
Arkansas City for 39 years.

RE:

Support of HB 2119-Clarifying that de minimis coverage and exhausted coverage are not
covered dental services

Good afternoon Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee,

I am Dr. Nick Rogers, President-elect of the Kansas Dental Association and for 38 years have
been a general dentist in Arkansas City. My practice also includes two other dentists which are
my son and my daughter-in-law and with three dentists we see many patients with a variety of
insurance plans representing many different insurance companies.

I am speaking today to show my support for HB 2119 which will preserve the integrity and
intent of KDSA 40-2, 185 that states “No contract issued or renewed after July 1, 2010, between
a health insurer and a dentist who is a participating provider with respect to such health
insurer's health benefit plan shall contain any provision which requires the dentist who provides
any service to an insured under such health benefit plan at a fee set or prescribed by the health
insurer unless such service is a covered service”.

Since that legislation was passed in 2010, some insurance companies have found ways to
circumvent the intent of this legislation. Two means in particular have evolved with some
insurance companies in recent years.

1) In one instance, in an effort to dictate fees of previously uncovered services, insurance
companies have expanded the number of procedures covered only to be reimburse the
dentist a minimal amount such as $1. 2) In other instances, insurance companies have

lowered the maximum reimbursement per year. Once a patient “max’s out” his/her
benefits, the insurance company is no longer responsible for any insurance
reimbursement. The insurance companies, however, continue to control the fee charged
by dentists for treatment.

Over the last few years, my practice and my patients have been negatively impacted by insurance
companies that have included these unfair policies that allow them to dictate what fees I can
charge for procedures that are not covered benefits by the respective plans. While I consider it
fair, as agreed to in my contracts, to accept a reasonably lower fee for covered procedures, it is
not fair for the insurance companies to force me to charge a lower fee for services that are not
benefits available through these plans. These contracts have no provisions for negotiation, and
that prevents me from being able to negotiate the terms of the agreements. It is a “Take it or
leave it” proposition.

Furthermore, unlike organized labor, dentists cannot band together to demand fair treatment and
resist abusive market power by insurance companies. Because of antitrust restrictions, the only
place dentists can turn for relief from this abuse is the government. Similarly, state dental
associations cannot involve themselves in contract decisions of individual dentists and are only
able to support the profession through the pursuit of changes in public policy.

Insurers are eroding the longstanding insurer-dentist relationship that has made dental care more
accessible and affordable for decades. Dentists accept discounted fees from insurance plans
based upon an agreement of covered services. Increasingly aggressive efforts by insurers to
dictate prices outside of covered services has resulted in a very substantial change in the
longstanding relationship between dental insurers and dentists, a relationship that has helped
make dental care more readily available and affordable.

These unfair practices by insurance companies are designed to make their plans appear more
attractive in the market. However, the artificial pricing set by insurers doesn’t save any money;
it will instead result in a cost shifting from those covered under the particular insurance plan to
everyone else – especially those who have no dental insurance and may be least able to pay.

Hence, this plan is a money maker for insurance companies, not a cost savings for those who pay
for and consume dental services. Moreover, decisions about a patient’s oral health care should
not be beholden to insurers marketing strategies.

The power to set prices for uncovered services effectively gives insurers the power to ration care.
Those covered under these plans will be able to access uncovered services at artificially set
prices that likely are not related to a paid benefit or to the cost of delivering the services.
Meanwhile, everyone else will bear the burden of cost shifting, and for some, the cost of these
services may become prohibitive. Thus, insurance companies are in effect making medical
decisions that should be made by a dentist with his or her patient.

I am dedicated to providing the best dental care possible to my patients, effectively and
efficiently, without sacrificing quality. I am very agreeable to reasonably lower fees for covered
benefits as stated in my contracts, but some policies are not fair to me or my patients. Therefore,
I am asking the committee to support HB 2119 so that small business participating providers like
me are not subject to unfair contract provisions that I must accept when signing these contracts.

I would like to thank the committee for your time to hear my concerns.

Nick Rogers, D.D.S.
1939 N. 11th Street
Arkansas City, Kansas 67005

