Testimony for House Bill 2121
House Health and Human Services Committee
By Aaron Dunkel, Executive Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association, Topeka Kansas
February 2, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
I am Aaron Dunkel, Executive Director for the Kansas Pharmacists Association (KPhA). The Kansas Pharmacists
Association is the statewide professional association that represents Kansas pharmacists from all practice
settings. Thank you for allowing me to submit testimony on behalf of KPhA in support of House Bill 2121. This
bill requires anyone authorized to administer vaccines in the state to report all vaccines to the state
immunization registry.
The state has an industry leading immunization registry and should use it to its highest potential. Utilization of
the immunization registry by all Kansas vaccinators will create a safer and more transparent immunization
environment for all patients and providers. By having all immunizations in one system providers will be able to
recall, almost instantaneously, whether a patient has had all their required vaccinations regardless of where
they received them. This tool helps to reduce the likelihood of missed immunizations. Complete patient
records in the immunization registry also minimize the likelihood of a patient receiving unnecessary or
duplicate immunizations simply because the patient or the patient’s caretaker cannot remember if they have
received a particular immunization. These duplicate immunizations not only are time consuming for the
provider and the patient, but are also costly. As an example, Prevnar 13, a common pneumococcal vaccine,
cost approximately $200 per dose. Through the immunization registry the state also captures allergic reactions
and contraindications that, when known, can reduce the likelihood of an adverse event during future
immunizations.
This system, if fully populated with all immunization data on an individual, also makes it easier for families
with school age children and those traveling overseas to areas with specific vaccination requirements to
retrieve their immunization history when and where they need it. Complete records are accessed through a
simple interface with the system that can be securely viewed in schools, local health departments, and any
participating provider’s office.
As health care providers, pharmacists recognize the incredible impact and value of modern immunizations to
both the individual and to the public health of our state. We also are dedicated to the protection of the
patient and appropriate care, and see the value of HB 2121 in helping deliver on both of these goals.
Thank you for your consideration of House Bill 2121.

Aaron Dunkel
Executive Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association

