7570 W 21st ST N
Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104

Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President
Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

President-Elect
John Feehan, MD, Olathe

Vice President
Jeremy Presley, MD,
Dodge City

Secretary
Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Treasurer
Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres./Board Chair
Diane Steere, MD, Wichita

AAFP Delegates
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA,
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates
Doug Gruenbacher, MD,
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors
Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP,
Lawrence
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD,
Smith Center
Holly Allen Terrell, MD, Wichita
Danelle Perry, MD, Olathe
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP,
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD,
Kansas City

Foundation President
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP,
Plainville

Executive Vice President
Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

Testimony: HB 2121 – Administration of Vaccines, Reports
House Health and Human Services Committee
February 2, 2017
By: Carolyn Gaughan, CAE, on behalf of KAFP (Written only)
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to offer testimony supporting the concept of HB
2121, on behalf of the Kansas Academy of Family Physicians (KAFP). Our organization
represents over 1,660 active, resident, student and life members across the state. The
mission of KAFP is to promote access to, and excellence in, health care for all Kansans
through education and advocacy for family physicians and their patients. Quality
health care and health outcomes for our patients guide our public policy work. As
family physicians, we see people of all ages, both men and women, and we work with
almost every type of ailment and illness that afflict our patients.
When I started as the Chapter Executive for KAFP many years ago, I received
many invitations to participate in a wide variety of health-related coalitions. I asked
the board to help prioritize what was the most important. The board said, “Focus on
tobacco cessation and on immunizations.” That’s what I did. Dr. (Rep.) Eplee and I
have served together for several years on a variety of immunization-related coalitions
and he is a true champion for immunizations in our state.
We are aware that not every physician giving immunizations uses WEB-IZ, and
that is unfortunate. Among their reasons: their staff may have to enter the
information twice if their EMR doesn’t automatically “push” the info to WEB-IZ; they
may have a high volume of immunizations that would take an extra position to get it
done. However, we believe the positive health benefits outweigh these
considerations.
The WEB-IZ immunization registry is an important part of the health records on
both a personal and a population-based level. And as payment systems inch towards
payment for value, not volume, physicians need to be able to show value by
participating in the registry. There is some (limited) funding available to help bring
EMRs to a more automated data input system.
For all these reasons we support HB 2121 especially with a 3-year time period
to comply. Best wishes in all your deliberations. Please let me know if you have
questions or need further information from KAFP.

