Kansas Association of
1260 SW Topeka Boulevard
Topeka, Kansas 66612

Osteopathic Medicine

www.kansasdo.org

Phone (785) 234 5563
Fax (785) 234 5564

kansasdo@aol.com

TESTIMONY
House Committee on Health and Human Services
HB 2030
January 23, 2017
My name is Bob Williams, Executive Director of the Kansas Association of Osteopathic Medicine
(KAOM). Thank you for this opportunity to address the Committee regarding HB 2030. KAOM is
opposed to HB 2030 in its current form.
KAOM respects and appreciates the important role of pharmacists in the health care delivery system.
Their knowledge and expertise pertaining to medications is invaluable. Nor do we question the ability of
properly trained pharmacists to administer injections. However, KAOM takes issue with pharmacists
administering vaccines to children, particularly those children under the age of 12.
Allergic reactions to vaccines is not unusual. This is of concern when vaccinating young children in that
a child’s allergic reactions to compounds contained in vaccines are unknown. It is therefore important
for the child to be in an environment where proper medical care can be immediately provided. We do
not believe a retail pharmacy provides that environment should a young child have an adverse reaction.
Young children have smaller tracheas than adults. Thus, their tracheas can close at a more rapid rate
than an adult or older children, placing them at a higher risk.
It is important for physicians to monitor and log children’s developmental progress. Each stage of the
immunization schedule is an opportunity for the child to be evaluated by a physician or nurse who is
trained to identify indication of illness, injury, or if the child is at an appropriate stage of development.
This opportunity will be lost if young children do not see a physician or nurse.
We believe the above are sufficient reasons to oppose HB 2030. However, KAOM has indicated to
pharmacy we would remove our objection if the age was raised to twelve and above.
Thank you.

