Testimony to the House Committee on Health and Human Services
House Bill 2124
534 S. Kansas Ave, Suite 330, Topeka, Kansas 66603
Telephone: 785-234-4773 / Fax: 785-234-3189
www.acmhck.org

February 2, 2017

Mister Chairman and members of the Committee, my name is Kyle Kessler. I am the Executive
Director for the Association of Community Mental Health Centers of Kansas, Inc. The Association
represents the 26 licensed Community Mental Health Centers (CMHCs) in Kansas that provide
behavioral health services in all 105 counties, 24-hours a day, seven days a week. In Kansas,
CMHCs are the local Mental Health Authorities coordinating the delivery of publicly funded
community-based mental health services. As part of licensing regulations, CMHCs are required to
provide services to all Kansans needing them, regardless of their ability to pay. This makes the
community mental health system the “safety net” for Kansans with mental health needs.
We appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB 2124 which would amend the
Medical Student and Resident Loan Assistance Act to include psychiatry for medical student loan
repayment. This would assist our state in recruiting and retaining psychiatrists, of which there is a
continual and ever growing shortage. This would be especially helpful in rural areas of the state for
mental health providers including CMHCs and the State Mental Health Hospitals (SMHHs) in
Osawatomie and Larned.
Kansas has an estimated 230 licensed and board certified psychiatrists. Seventy percent of those
are in Johnson, Douglas, Wyandotte, Shawnee, and Riley Counties. Thirty percent of those are over
the age of 65. Outside of the northeast part of the state, Sedgwick County has the largest number of
licensed psychiatrists and 31 percent of them are over the age of 65. These statistics underscore the
need for Kansas to increase and improve its strategies for recruitment and retention of psychiatrists
and compel aspiring physicians into this field.
According to the American Medical Association, the number of adult and child psychiatrists rose by
only 12 percent from 1994 to 2013, from 43,640 to 49,079. During that span, the U.S. population
increased by about 37 percent; meanwhile, millions more Americans have become eligible for mental
health coverage due to the passage of the Paul Wellstone and Pete Domenici Mental Health Parity
and Addiction Equity Act of 2008. Although the number of licensed psychiatrists is increasing, the
sheer volume of mental health need is surpassing the status quo. The CMHC System in Kansas is
an excellent example of the increased need for treatment as CMHCs provided treatment to 10,000
more Kansans last year than the previous year.
An article in Modern Healthcare published last week explains the shortage in more detail by saying,
“The number of newly trained physicians willing to enter psychiatry hasn’t kept pace with the growing
demand for care. In fact, there aren’t even enough new professionals to replace aging baby boomer
psychiatrists, who are starting to retire in droves.” In the same article, Dr. Joe Parks, Senior Medical
Director for the National Council for Behavioral Health and former Medicaid Director for the State of
Missouri, states, “The recruitment rate into psychiatry has been flat for a couple of decades while the
demand has gone up.”

Association of Community Mental Health Centers of Kansas, Inc.
Testimony Supporting SB 32
Page 2
Our Association has put forth an initiative known as Mental Health 2020 (MH 2020) to help address
the workforce shortage of psychiatrists, to establish more community crisis stabilization centers and
to restore funding for CMHCs that has eroded over the last ten years. HB 2124 is one part of MH
2020. At the appropriate time, we would ask your consideration for adding an amendment to this bill
that would preserve slots in the current program and adding slots for psychiatry. We ask you to
support this legislation and pass it favorably out of Committee with the prospective amendment.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today, and I will stand for questions at
the appropriate time.

2

