7570 W 21st ST N
Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104

Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President
Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

President-Elect
John Feehan, MD, Olathe

Vice President
Jeremy Presley, MD,
Dodge City

Secretary
Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Treasurer
Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres./Board Chair
Diane Steere, MD, Wichita

AAFP Delegates
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA,
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates
Doug Gruenbacher, MD,
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors
Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP,
Lawrence
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD,
Smith Center
Holly Allen Terrell, MD, Wichita
Danelle Perry, MD, Olathe
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP,
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD,
Kansas City

Foundation President
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP,
Plainville

Executive Vice President
Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

Testimony: HB 2124
Kansas Medical Student Loan Program and
Kansas Medical Residency Bridging Program
House Health and Human Services Committee
February 2, 2017
By: Dr. Chantel Long, on behalf of KAFP
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony opposing HB 2124, as it is
currently written. My name is Dr. Chantel Long and I’m a family physician in Salina, on
faculty at the Smoky Hill Family Medicine Residency Program.
I’m speaking on behalf of my membership society, the Kansas Academy of Family
Physicians (KAFP). Our organization represents over 1,660 active, resident, student
and life members across the state. The mission of KAFP is to promote access to, and
excellence in, health care for all Kansans through education and advocacy for family
physicians and their patients. Quality health care and health outcomes for our patients
guide our public policy work. As family physicians, we see people of all ages, both men
and women, and we work with almost every type of ailment and illness that afflict our
patients.
The Kansas Medical Student Loan Program (MSLP) was designed years ago to
encourage primary care physicians to practice in underserved counties in Kansas. The
program works by requiring a one-year practice commitment in an under-served
county for every year of participation in the MSLP.
Similarly, the Kansas Medical Residency Bridging Program (MRBP) provides loan
support to primary care residents, based on their commitment to practice in
underserved counties. Each loan in this program is funded 50% by the state and 50%
by the communities where residents plan to practice upon graduation.
Currently, the MSLP is funded to allow about 30 students to enter per year. The MRBP
currently has 14 participants per year.
A high percentage of resident graduates locate within 60 miles of their residency
programs. If they leave the state for residency, they are very likely to set up practice
elsewhere. However, most of those who are MSLP recipients come back to Kansas to
practice and fulfil their service obligations. More importantly, the majority maintain
practice in the state after paying back their obligation.

Given the success of the MSLP and MRBP in building our primary care physician
network in underserved counties, KAFP is strongly opposed to any effort to diminish
the intended goal of the programs by adding any non-primary care specialty.
We do not dispute that there is a critical shortage of psychiatrists in these underserved
counties. If the legislature wishes to start a similar program for psychiatrists, that is
clearly a policy decision this body may choose to make. In fact, we would support
such an effort if it is done in a way that does not diminish the number of loan slots
and funding available for primary care in the MSLP and MRBP. We believe that
setting up such programs separate from the current programs for primary care
physicians, with separate funding and reporting, would be advisable.
There is a significant difference between the practice of primary care specialties and
that of specialties such as psychiatry, related to the breadth of practice. If the
program is opened to psychiatrists and if a psychiatrist were to choose to practice in
an area without a primary care physician, the community would still need a family
physician or other primary care physician to take care of the full scope of patients’
health needs. (E.g., pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, blood pressure, diabetes,
asthma, preventive care, etc.) There remains a significant shortage of primary care
physicians in rural Kansas and, short of the MSLP, this problem will only increase.
Before closing, I want to share briefly about my experiences with the MSLP. I was a
blessed recipient of the scholarship and still remember how excited my parents and I
were when I received it. We celebrated the scholarship more than my acceptance
letter to medical school. Why? I already knew I wanted to stay and practice in Kansas
but I was extremely concerned about the cost of my education and had immediately
started weighing all of my options. With the MSLP, I was assured that Kansas not only
needed me, but wanted me to remain here and practice medicine. The decision to
stay in Kansas for medical school, residency, and private practice was then a certainty
and I never hesitated or looked back. I now supervise and teach recipients, and watch
this program solidify their Kansas choice on a yearly basis. I now see students already
choosing their permanent rural practice locations up to 6 years in advance. When the
state invests in them, it inspires them to give back.
If the bill were to be amended as recommended earlier in this testimony – in a way
that clearly delineates between primary care and psychiatry in both the MSLP and the
MRBP – KAFP would withdraw our opposition to HB 2124 and, in fact, would support
such an effort.

