February 14, 2017
Todd M Thurlow, DDS
Overland Park, KS
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to support House Bill 2139. My name is Dr. Todd Thurlow, and I am a
general dentist in Johnson County. I provide services to a variety of patients, including those with
traditional insurance, KanCare insurance, and the uninsured. In my over 20 years of practice, I have
seen the growing need for providers for the underserved in our community. I am a regular volunteer
for the Kansas Mission of Mercy (KMOM), Donated Dental Services, veteran’s programs, and TeamSmile.
I see patients from long‐term care facilities who require extensive care, and developmentally disabled
children and adults. As a member of the American Dental Association, the Kansas Dental Association,
and the Fifth District Dental Society, I am acutely aware of the direction that organized dentistry is going
and I see little movement to truly solve access to care issues. Projects like KMOM and Donated Dental
Services are important and provide much‐needed service to individuals, but they are not a substitute
for regular dental care and the security of having a relationship with a dental professional who can
provide ongoing education and preventative care. Adding another provider, a dental therapist, is an
opportunity to make a meaningful difference in delivering more routine care to the underserved.
I support dental therapy in Kansas because I have seen firsthand the high‐quality care provided by
dental therapists when I toured the school and training clinics in Alaska. The curriculum, books, and
other materials are identical to what is used in dental schools; the dental therapists simply have a
narrower scope of practice and spend significant time providing oral hygiene education to help break
the cycle of disease. The supervision by teledentistry ensures the proper diagnosis is made and
treatment is provided in a safe and efficient manner. The dentist as the team leader still holds
responsibility for total patient care. The difference is that the dental therapist can provide routine care
so that the dentist can perform the more extensive procedures – meaning more patients can be served.
It is often said that dentists can’t “drill their way out of this problem,” and that we should focus on
preventing dental decay instead of drilling and filling existing cavities. But in order to make a true
impact, treating the dental decay is exactly where we need to start – and we cannot do it alone! Dental
therapists can treat conditions while they are minor, preventing more extensive and expensive problems
developing later on.
Similarly, scholarship programs alone cannot solve this problem. While the Kansas Dental Association’s
Kansas Initiative for New Dentists (KIND) scholarship program has planted five dental students in Kansas
and has four in progress, it does not reach the greatest need in our state. Ford, Elk, Labette, Cherokee
and Finney counties have the highest number of children K‐12 with untreated decay, and none of the
KIND dentists are practicing near these areas.
Before traveling to Alaska, like most dentists, I was skeptical. I went to school for eight years to become
a dentist, and I was concerned about a dental therapist providing some of the same care I do. Seeing the
cases that the dental therapists treated and evaluating the program critically changed my mind. I
believe dental therapists could significantly improve our state’s oral healthcare, and I thank you for
the opportunity to support House Bill 2139.

