455 SE Golf Park Blvd
Topeka, KS 66605
785.234.0878
www.kacap.org

February 14, 2017
Scott Anglemyer
Kansas Association of Community Action Programs
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee
Thank you for the opportunity to address the Committee and to voice support for House Bill
2139. My name is Scott Anglemyer, and I am executive director of the Kansas Association of
Community Action Programs (KACAP). KACAP is the membership association for Community
Action Agencies in Kansas that are working to create economic opportunity and end poverty in
their communities.
Access to health care is an issue that Community Action Agencies often encounter when
working with low-income families. Thousands of people in Kansas can’t get dental care when
and where they need it. The fact is, finding a dentist is tough, especially for those who rely on
public health insurance. There’s a dental provider shortage in Kansas leaving 87 of our counties
unable to keep up with the demand for oral health care. Instead of getting the treatment they
need, people live in pain, miss school or work and develop life-threatening infections.
The good news is we already know how to dramatically improve access to dental care: allow
dental therapists to perform routine dental care. It’s a safe, cost-effective and productive
solutions to the crisis.
Mid-level dental providers have been utilized by more than 50 countries for almost a century and
are now practicing in Minnesota, Alaska, Oregon, and Washington, and are authorized in Maine
and Vermont. In all, more than 20 states are currently considering allowing these health
professionals to provide routine and preventive care like cleanings, fillings and some extractions.
A 2012 expert review of over 1,000 studies and reports concluded that the quality of care
provided by dental therapists within the scope of their role was comparable to that of a dentist –
and in some studies was judged superior.

KACAP Member Agencies and Board of Directors
Community Action, Inc.
East Central Kansas Economic Opportunity Corporation
Economic Opportunity Foundation
Harvest America Corporation

Mid-Kansas Community Action Program
Northeast Kansas Community Action Program
Southeast Kansas Community Action Program
Wichita Sedgwick County Community Action Partnership

KACAP testimony on HB 2139, page 2
While studies show conclusively that mid-level dental providers deliver safe, quality care, these
workers also boost the economy. They allow dentists to grow their practices and increase
revenues while treating more patients. The model creates new, good jobs that offer a career
ladder for current dental employees. Finally, by improving the health care options available to
employees and their families, implementing mid-level dental helps communities attract new
businesses.
Change is never easy. When dental hygienists were introduced in the early part of the last
century, organized dentistry opposed them. Likewise, the medical community initially pushed
back against physician assistants and nurse practitioners. Now, however, dentists and doctors
can’t imagine functioning without these skilled team members, and our health care is far better
because of it.
We respectfully ask for support of House Bill 2139.

