To:
Chairman Hawkins, and Members, House Health and Human Services Committee
From: Rachel Monger, Vice President of Government Affairs
Date: February 14, 2017
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2139
Thank you, Chairman and Members of the Committee. I am Rachel Monger, Vice President of
Government Affairs for LeadingAge Kansas, the state association for not-for-profit aging services. We
have 150 members across Kansas, which include not-for-profit nursing homes, retirement communities,
hospital long-term care units, assisted living, homes plus, housing, low-income housing, home health
agencies, home and community based service programs, PACE and Meals on Wheels. Our members
serve more than 25,000 elders each day.
LeadingAge Kansas supports House Bill 2139, and its creation of a new Registered Dental Practitioner
license category. The purpose of the new mid-level practitioner license is to improve access and
affordability of dental care to underserved populations, including those without dental insurance or for
persons receiving Medicaid. Recruitment and retention of dentists has been an ongoing problem in
Kansas, and many of our current dentists are approaching retirement with no one to replace them.
Access to routine dental care is an essential health issue for elder Kansans. Most people lose their
dental insurance coverage when they retire. Medicare does not cover routine dental care, and only
provides a few limited services deemed “medically necessary.” Medicaid also no longer covers oral
health care for adults, except for “emergency services.” Under KanCare, MCOs offer a limited number
of preventative dental visits a year. Nursing home residents and elders who are home-bound or
disabled often have limited access to dental care. Nursing homes do not employ dental staff, and
transportation and access to a dentist’s office is often a steep barrier (especially in rural areas). The
creation of Registered Dental Practitioners would provide the opportunity for regular dental treatment,
rather than seniors relying on emergency care that comes too late.
We thank the committee for its time and consideration of this issue. We hope you will support the
passage of House Bill 2139.

