February 14, 2017
Melinda K. Miner, D.D.S. The Dentist P.A.
thedentistmelinda@gmail.com
House Bill 2139 House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
My name is Melinda Miner DDS. I own a private dental practice in Hays, Kansas that employs 12 people.
Until Jan 1, 2017 we served a clientele that included over 3000 children enrolled in Kan Care along with
4000 other patients. I had accepted Medicaid (Kan Care) patients since moving to Hays in August of
2000; we were the only providers for the first 9 years. There had not been a Dentist in our town that would
take it since 1997. Seventeen years later I was forced to make a difficult decision. I decided to cease
being a provider for Kan Care. This was not an easy decision but was necessary to keep my practice
from going bankrupt. You see, the reimbursement from Kan Care was cut another 4% and we were
already struggling to afford to see these kids. That blow from the state forced me and many others out of
the Kan Care network. I personally know of 5 Dentists that left the Network in the past 6 months. Had I
been able to hire a Dental Therapist 6-7 years ago I would currently have lower overhead and would be
able to stay in the program. My Therapist could handle the bulk of the Kan Care patients while I focus on
procedures that pay the bills better. It would be a win for my practice and a win for the 3000 kids that now
do not have a Dentist.
There are few Dentists that enjoy treating children and even fewer that will accept 35% of their fees as
payment. We now have 1 temporary Dentist in Hays at our FQHC that will accept Kan Care. FQHCs get
paid different but they still struggle financially even with their grants. Our community of Western Kansas
has only about 35 Dentists in the Kan Care network in the whole half of the state. Many of these Dentists
will not take on any new patients. There simply are not enough Dentists that can afford to lose money by
taking these kids into their practice. The problem is not getting better and there have been no real
solutions. A new Dentist out of school is never going to decide to provide for Kan Care in a private
practice setting because getting paid 35% of our fees does not keep the office open. It’s economics.
There are not enough Dentists in the state for all the people and so why fill your office with Kan Care
when you can have patients that pay you in full? House Bill 2139 establishing a Dental Therapist is ideal
for a practice that wants to take Kan Care but not go bankrupt.
The main argument I keep hearing against the Therapist is a fear of public safety. That a therapist will
hurt the public is silly. Therapists work in Alaska in remote villages and have not had a single complaint or
bad outcome! They are doing the easy part of Dentistry. We all know that no profession wants to think
that someone else could do their job. I believe its not fear for the public but fear for the Dentists.
Therapists would have supervision and most would work with a Dentist in the building. It would be up to
the Dentist to decide what their Therapist can or can’t do. Any Dentist that would agree to supervise, and
then fail that Therapist by not ensuring quality, would have to face the dental board when the outcome is
not good. Just as any other employee there is a responsibility to assure quality in what they do for us. As
long as the Therapist is held to the same standard of care, the same clinical board exam, the same
continuing education requirements, and they are supported by their supervising Dentists, there is no need
to worry about their competence. If they were to take the exact dental board as the Dentists from UMKC
and were to pass would we not agree that they are competent to practice? I would ensure quality from my
therapist; they will be treating my patients.
The reality is that providers for a lot of the low-income children of Western Kansas are the ones that
would utilize this model and our patients would benefit from it greatly. I support House Bill 2139. The
employing Dentist would be responsible for the outcomes in our own offices and we would assure the
same quality we give currently. I ask the Dentists in opposition: why are you opposed to something that
would help me to serve low-income patients when you are not willing or able to do so? Do you oppose
your Hygienists and Assistants? Please understand that Dental Therapists would be beneficial to my
community of Western Kansas. We desperately need some solution to the Kan Care network problem.
Adding Dental Therapists is a solution that is tax dollar neutral and will make a huge difference for the
citizens of Kansas. Every new Therapist would work under a dentist in the Kan Care network. Think how
much that would help out the current network crisis.
Thank you for your time,
Melinda Miner DDS

