Leon A. Assael, DMD
Professor, School of Dentistry
University of Minnesota
15‐2009 Moos Tower
515 Delaware Street, SE
Minneapolis, MN 55455
February 14, 2017
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
I am writing to express my strong support for the effort of the State of Kansas to enact a state
law to improve the oral health of its citizens. I am Professor and Dean Emeritus of the
University Of Minnesota School Of Dentistry, where we are training Minnesota's dental
therapists. Thank you for offering this opportunity to submit testimony in support of House Bill
2139.
We have two programs in Minnesota, one at the University Of Minnesota School Of Dentistry
and one at the Minnesota State Colleges and Universities (MNSCU). Sixty‐four dental therapy
graduates are already in practice providing needed dental care to underserved patients and
communities in Minnesota. I am proud of our graduates and am confident that their patients
are well‐served and receive the highest quality of dental care in a variety of dental practices
in our state.
I firmly believe that dental therapists in Minnesota are well‐accepted members of the dental
team and are embraced by dentists for whom they are key team members, and by their
patients who value their professionalism, skill and care. I believe that the near future will bring
the benefits of dental therapy and improved oral health to the public and dental practices
across our nation.
Our dental health care system must change to address the ravages of untreated disease.
Dental caries remains the number one untreated disease in children and the domiciled elderly,
and destroys an essential organ system, the masticatory system in adults. As in other parts of
our health care system, our workforce must continue to evolve to embrace the concept of
teams, with each team member working at the level consistent with their education and
training.
The five‐year report on dental therapy from the Minnesota department of health indicates that
more dental therapists are serving rural and underserved communities by far than new dentists
during the same period. The waiting and travel time for patients has been diminished and
access to care for working families and those on public assistance has been improved. The
broad distribution of dental therapists in Minnesota to high dental disease underserved areas is
a valuable illustration of how this law could work in Kansas, not only supporting the oral health
of communities but the sustainability of dental practices in underserved communities.

ECONOMICS OF DENTAL THERAPY
As the first state to have dental therapy programs to serve the public, Minnesota has been able
to study the costs and economic impact of dental therapists over 7 years.
Regarding the cost of education, the University of Minnesota School of Dentistry dental therapy
program is a 7‐semester one in Minnesota and it results in a Masters of Dental Therapy. The
total tuition and fees for completion of the dental therapy program for Minnesotans are
$76,613 over 3 years. The DDS program is an 11 semester program and the tuition and fees for
completion of the DDS program for Minnesotans are $ 209,383. Thus the direct costs of
educating a dental therapist are about 1/3 the costs of educating a dentist.
Regarding the costs of care, from the patient (care recipient perspective) waiting times for
urgent appointments have been reduced 30% (from 46% less than a week appointment to 18%)
in practices with dental therapists. Travel times to appointments have been reduced for
patients on public assistance by 16%. With the direct costs of transportation for patients on
public assistance and those with special needs, dental therapists have provided this added
advantage.
CONCLUSION
Change is hard and will be resisted by some, but I urge you to stand for our patients, dental
practices, and your constituents. I encourage you to support this effort in your state. Dental
therapists will reduce costs of dental care and improve access for underserved communities.
Our University of Minnesota and MNSCU dental therapy graduates are living proof of that
achievement. Thank you for the opportunity to support House Bill 2139.
Sincerely,
Leon A. Assael

