100 East First Avenue

P.O. Box 1384

Hutchinson, Kansas 67504-1384

(620)662-8586

Fax: (620) 662-8597

www.healthfund.org

February 14, 2017
Health and Human Services Committee
Kansas House of Representatives
Statehouse
Topeka KS
RE: HOUSE BILL 2139 (dental therapist)
Dear Chairman Hawkins and committee members:
Thank you for giving a hearing for this legislation which has the potential to materially improve the lives of
thousands of Kansans.
The problem of access to dental care is a long-term and large problem in our state. Because care in the mouth
beyond some prevention is tied exclusively to the delivery of services by a licensed dentist, the presence or
absence of a dentist means care or no care for Kansans. In our eleven years of experience with an oral health
initiative investing more than $11 million in oral health work, I learned this abiding fact that the ability to locate
and incentivize dentists to reach rural areas, to serve difficult-to-serve populations (those with disabilities, for
example) and to accommodate low income (low or no paying) patients is very limited.
States with one, two or three dental schools and states with higher rates of Medicaid reimbursement than Kansas
end up with the same intractable dental care access problem we have in Kansas. Except for the welcome
sporadic, limited charitable care provided by some caring dentists, the same populations—rural, low income,
special needs, Native Americans—experience extreme delays in receiving dental care and end up with other
health problems. These people are frequently so affected by dental disease that they miss educational and work
days. The number of trained dentists is small who will reorganize their practice to serve low paying, higher
volumes, work in a safety net clinic, locate in a frontier/rural area or accept Medicaid patients. In Kansas the
percentage of dentists accepting Medicaid is frequently in the 25-33% range, and many of these limit the number
of Medicaid patients to a fraction of their practices. Various approaches to enlarge that small percentage of
dentists have been tried unsuccessfully through the years—better Medicaid reimbursement, scholarships/loan
repayments, public moral suasion with support of professional dentistry, changes in dental school admission
practices, etc. All end up with the same result—lack of dental care for thousands of residents who desperately
need care.
The proposed legislation simply recognizes this abiding fact of the dental community and builds on those
dentists who are willing to serve these populations. In effect, a dental therapist extends the care provided by
the dentist as part of the dental team. This will permit location by the willing dentists into small rural
communities through the dental therapist. This will permit safety net clinics and dentists

Testimony—House Bill 2139
Kim Moore, United Methodist Health Ministry Fund
already serving Medicaid populations to have expanded capacity to serve more and serve them on a timely basis.
After a few years, it will permit many dentists to expand their practice, as this the new dental professional
becomes—like the medical mid-levels—a clear path to greater personal dental income and greater service for
many, many dentists.
This is not an innovation. Already tried and validated in more than fifty countries around the world and in full
expression or pilot in at least four states, there is no question that dental therapists with the protections in HB
2139—hygiene education plus accredited training, experience under dentists for an extended probationary period
and continuing as part of the dental team (no independent practice)—can deliver the defined and highly needed
set of services competently. Independent research funded by national health philanthropies has validated the
safety and competence of dental therapists having less training than will be required by HB 2139.
Who opposes dental therapists? Only one group…professional dentistry. Their opposition is masked in comments
about patient safety and broad warnings that you don’t want a person with less than eight years of post-high
school training doing surgery in your mouth. Interesting comment. We have, right now in Kansas, dentists with
six years of training (three college/three dental school) doing the full range of services in our Kansans’ mouths
(UMKC had a 3/3 program until the last 25 years or so). The Commission on Dental Accreditation has
established—based on experience and research by its broad group of dental professionals—what training is
needed for a dental therapist and HB 2139 follows the nationally researched standard for that training.
Frankly, I am not quite sure why KDA worries about bringing a new member of the dental team into existence. All
advocates for HB 2139 want a dental team led by the dentist. There is no slippery slope in the minds of the
Kansas Dental Project and its supporters to materially affect the leadership and long-term control by licensed
dentists of the mouths of Kansans. The existence of dental therapists will, in the long run, make dental practices
more commercially viable as have mid-levels in medical practices. Those dentists not approving of dental
therapy can simply not employ one.
It is time to give thousands of needy Kansans access to dental services. HB 2139 is the only real path to do that
and do it without costing the State of Kansas a penny.

Sincerely,

Kim Moore
President

