February 14, 2017
Katrina McGivern, Kansas Association for the Medically Underserved
Amanda Gress, Kansas Action for Children
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
On behalf of the members of the Kansas Dental Project coalition, we ask you to support
House Bill 2139. Professional associations, health philanthropies, advocacy organizations,
social services providers, dental professionals, and Kansas citizens recognize that dental
therapists will fill the gap in the Kansas dental workforce that leaves 87 of our state’s 105
counties without enough dental providers. Children, the elderly, people with disabilities,
rural residents, and Kansans with public insurance or no insurance face particular
challenges in accessing needed care. Allowing Kansas dentists and safety net clinics to
hire dental therapists will improve access to dental care and the Kansas economy.

www.kansasdental.com

Dental therapists are highly trained oral health providers who work with a dentist’s
supervision. Kansas dental therapists will be dental hygienists who obtain advanced
education and training at programs accredited by the Commission on Dental
Accreditation. They will then pass comprehensive clinical examinations. Similar to
physician assistants, they will always work with the supervision of a dentist.
Dental therapists will provide cost‐effective dental care. Dental therapists can provide
some of the same routine care dentists provide now, and cost less to employ than
dentists. Adding a dental therapist to the dental team frees up dentists to focus on more
complex procedures, allowing the entire team to operate more efficiently.
Dental therapists will ensure that more Kansans receive the dental care they need.
Dental therapists will make it more cost‐effective for private dental practices to serve
patients with KanCare insurance, and allow safety net clinics to serve more patients.
Dental therapists will work in schools, nursing homes, disability service centers, rural
areas, and other underserved areas so that more Kansans can receive dental care.
Establishing dental therapists will create jobs and grow the Kansas economy. Dentists
who hire dental therapists can see more patients with KanCare insurance or no insurance
and grow their practices. Hiring a dental therapist will allow a dental practice to generate
an additional $125,000 in profit annually. Dental therapists are well‐paid professionals,
and new dental therapy jobs create a career ladder for Kansas dental hygienists.
It is time to allow Kansas dentists and safety net clinics to hire dental therapists. There
is shared understanding that far too many Kansans struggle to access dental care. Dental
therapists are a commonsense solution to address our state’s dental access crisis. The
Kansas Legislature can authorize dental therapists to practice at no cost to the state,
making this a model worthy of serious consideration as a financially viable strategy to
expand access to oral health care. Please support House Bill 2139.

The Kansas Dental Project
is a collaborative effort by
Kansas citizens, community
leaders and health care
professionals to address the
dental workforce shortage in
Kansas and improve access to
dental care for Kansans in rural
and underserved areas.
The Kansas Dental Project
is spearheaded by:
Kansas Action for Children
720 SW Jackson, Suite 201
Topeka, Kansas 66603
785.232.0550
Kansas Association for the
Medically Underserved
700 SW Jackson, Suite 600
Topeka, Kansas 66603
785.233.8483

American Academy of
Pediatrics, Kansas Chapter
American Association For
Community Dental Programs
Americans for Prosperity,
Kansas Chapter
Association of Community
Mental Health Centers of
Kansas
Black Health Care Coalition
of Kansas City

EmberHope

Medical Service Bureau

Family Resource Center of
Pittsburg

Mother and Child Health
Coalition

Finney County Community
Health Coalition

National Alliance on Mental
Illness, Kansas Chapter

Interhab

National Association of
Community Health Centers

Kansas Action For Children
Kansas Advocates for Better
Care

Children’s Alliance of Kansas

Kansas Area Agencies on Aging
Association

Communities Creating
Opportunity (CCO)

Kansas Association for the
Medically Underserved

Communities in Schools of
Kansas Inc.

Kansas Association of
Community Action Programs

Community Action Inc.

Kansas Association of Local
Health Departments

Community Health Council of
Wyandotte County
Cross-Lines Community
Outreach Inc.
Disability Rights Center of
Kansas

Kansas Children’s Service
League
Kansas Dental Hygienists’
Association
Kansas Farmers Union

National Rural Health
Association
Northeast Kansas Community
Action Program
Oral Health America
Oral Health Kansas
Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation
Southeast Kansas Community
Action Program
Statewide Independent Living
Council of Kansas
Success By 6 Coalition of
Douglas County
Sunflower State Health
Thrive Allen County

Dodge City Peaceful Tribe

Kansas Health Care Association

Douglas County Community
Health Improvement
Partnership

Kansas Legislative Policy Group

Topeka Independent Living
Resource Center

Kansas Public Health
Association

The Whole Person

East Central Kansas Economic
Opportunity Corporation
(ECKAN)

Kansas Statewide Homeless
Coalition

Economic Opportunity
Foundation Inc.
El Centro Inc.

Keys for Networking
Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas
LeadingAge Kansas

