Testimony – House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee – February 17, 2017
Jason Wesco, Executive Vice-President
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee, thank you for allowing me to provide written
testimony in support of House Bill 2139.
The Community Health Center of Southeast Kansas (CHC/SEK) provides access to medical, behavioral
and dental care services to all individuals regardless of their ability to pay. Last year we cared for more
than 40,000 patients during nearly 160,000 visits to clinics located in Baxter Springs, Coffeyville,
Columbus, Independence, Iola, Parsons and Pittsburg. This included more than 24,000 dental visits. Our
dental program employs five dentists and thirteen dental hygienists (all with Extended Care Permits) that
offer services in five clinical locations and on-site in schools, County Health Departments, Head Starts
and other facilities across Southeast Kansas. The growth in our dental services has been significant since
the inception of the program in 2005.
In my work at CHC/SEK, I am responsible for all aspects of our dental program, from new program
development and strategic planning to recruitment of dentists and dental hygienists. I have seen firsthand the critical lack of access to dental care that exists in rural Kansas, not just for the
underserved, but for entire communities. As a Community Health Center, we concern ourselves with
access to care for everyone, not just the underserved. And we are very concerned about the current and
especially the future of access to oral health care in Kansas.
Since inception, our dental clinics have cared for patients from twenty-six Kansas counties and we
regularly see patients that drive from seventy-five miles away to obtain affordable dental care.
This demand has been the impetus for the rapid expansion of our dental program, but even with
our expansion we are still hopelessly understaffed. In Southeast Kansas alone, there are more than
75,000 low-income individuals in the nine county region – nearly 40% of the total population. But the
problem doesn’t stop here. There are about 170,000 individuals in our region and, at my last count, 44
general practice dentists (and no pediatric dentists, no endodontists and just one oral surgeon) not all of
whom work full time and inclusive of dentists employed by CHC/SEK. On average in the nine counties,
the ratio is one dentist for every 4,047 residents (KDHE, Kansas Health Matters, 2013). The ratio in
Kansas is about 1:2,734 (KDHE, Kansas Health Matters, 2013), and in the nation about 1:1,666
(American Dental Association, 2015). By any measure we are critically underserved.
To further compound the problem, we have an aging dental workforce. According to KDHE’s Bureau of
Oral Health’s workforce survey conducted in 2011, the average age of a dentist practicing in rural Kansas
was about 55. With the increasing demand for care and the deceasing supply of dentists, we are facing a
crisis in access to dental care of increasing severity over the next 10 years – assuming attrition in
providers that tends to come with an aging workforce – which we have certainly seen since the KDHE
report’s publication in 2011. In some of our counties over that time, I anticipate that we may be the
only source of dental care available for anyone, insured or not, wealthy or poor. This reality will
P.O. Box 1832, 3011 N. Michigan, Pittsburg, KS 66762-1832

Phone: 620.231.9873

Fax: 620.231.5062

strain our resources tremendously. In fact, there is no way, given the current environment that we
would be able to provide adequate access to care to additional patients.
House Bill 2139 proposes allowing dentists and safety net clinics to hire dental therapists, mid-level
providers that would function much the same way as Advanced Practice Registered Nurses and
Physician’s Assistants do in the medical field. Dental therapists would mean safety net clinics like
ours could greatly expand access to quality dental care, in the same way that we use medical midlevels to extend the reach of our physicians. In our medical practice, we employ fifteen physicians and
eighteen A.P.R.N’s and P.A.’s. I expect the same kind of ratio in our dental practice if we were to have
access to dental therapists. If we were to hire six dental therapists, we estimate that an additional
8,000 patients could be cared for during 15,000 visits each year.
Dental therapists would also help CHC/SEK recruit and retain dental providers who would stay in
Southeast Kansas long-term. Dental therapists would mean an increased provider pool from which we
could recruit. Currently, of the five dentists we employ none are Southeast Kansas natives, a fact that
could lead to long-term retention issues. Expanding the provider dental provider pool to include dental
therapists, would increase the likelihood of finding regional natives that would choose to practice (and
remain long-term) in the area. This increased provider pool would allow us to increase capacity at our
current clinical sites and to more readily expand into communities where CHC/SEK does not currently
have a physical presence.
In short, the dental therapist is the best tool we have at our disposal to help eliminate numerous
barriers that many Kansans face today in accessing oral health care. Over the next decade, the
conjoined problems of access to care and the declining dental workforce, problems that have traditionally
affected the uninsured and those with public health benefits, threaten to make most Kansans
“underserved.”
This legislation before you appeals to, as Lincoln said, “the better angels of our nature.” It says “yes” to
our fellow Kansans in need who are so accustomed to being told “no.” It illustrates our heritage as a
people who seek out, find and implement unique solutions to complex challenges. It carries on the proud
Kansas tradition of passing forward-thinking legislation in the public’s interest.
On behalf of our board, staff, patients and most importantly those we are as yet unable to serve, I
ask that you support House Bill 2139.
Thank you for considering my testimony. Best wishes as you deliberate on this matter.

P.O. Box 1832, 3011 N. Michigan, Pittsburg, KS 66762-1832

Phone: 620.231.9873

Fax: 620.231.5062

