Frank Catalanotto, DMD
Professor, Department of Community Dentistry and Behavioral Sciences
1329 SW 16th Street, PO BOX 103628
Gainesville, FL 32610-3628
Office, 352-273-5970; Cell, 352-256-5909
fcatalanotto@dental.ufl.edu
February 14, 2017
Dear Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit this testimony in support of House Bill 2139. I am
a long-time dental educator and researcher. I am currently Chair of the Board of Directors of the
ACORN Clinic (a local not-for-profit providing medical and dental care to the underserved), the
immediate past Chair of the Board of Directors Oral Health America (national non-profit oral
health advocacy group), and the former dean of the University of Florida College of Dentistry
and a past president of the American Dental Education Association (representing all academic
dental institutions in the United States). I have also been a sub-committee member of the
Commission of Dental Accreditation (CODA) and a consultant/site visitor for dental education
accreditation. As you can see from my credentials, I care deeply about the dental profession and
access to oral health care.
Dental therapists are safe. I have been researching oral health care access since 2002 and have
seen dental therapy in action while visiting sites where dental therapists work in both Alaska and
Minnesota. As a result, I can tell you dental therapists are safe, proven members of the dental
care delivery team. Dental therapy has been used in over 50 modern industrialized countries for
about 100 years.
Dental therapists improve access to care. The evidence from Minnesota and Alaska shows that
dental therapists are very effective in reducing wait times at overwhelmed clinics, working well
with dentists, and decreasing use of hospital emergency departments, among other positive
outcomes.
Dental therapists are highly trained in the procedures they practice. House Bill 2139
includes educational standards established by the Commission of Dental Accreditation (CODA).
CODA is made up of representatives from organized dentistry, educational programs, licensure
groups, specialty organizations and the public and is authorized by the US Department of
Education. Just as CODA accreditation ensures that dentists graduate at the highest standards
possible, CODA accreditation assures that dental therapists will also graduate with the highest
standards of quality. It is a recognition of the safety and efficacy of dental therapists in taking
care of patients.

I am frequently asked how dental therapists can be educated in only 2-3 years while it takes 8
years for dental education (4 years of college and 4 years of dental school). The answer is
simple; dental therapists only perform a small subset of the procedures that a dentist performs.
As a dentist I learned about 500 skills, also known as competencies, while a dental therapist only
learns about 50-60. Though narrow, this scope of practice is geared towards underserved
communities, and they are the most regularly used procedures.
More importantly, for those procedures within their scope of practice, dental therapists do the
procedures more frequently while in school than dental students do. Dental therapists are trained
to do the routine, “bread and butter” procedures of dental practices; fillings, preventive
treatments, extractions, stainless steel crowns and pulpotomies/nerve treatments.
Dental therapists boost productivity and are cost effective for dental practices. When dental
therapy was implemented in Minnesota, there were strong objections from organized dentistry.
After implementation, there was a remarkable change of heart among dentists. The state has now
graduated 54 therapists, most fully employed. Twenty-four are employed in private dental
practices and the others are in nonprofit clinics, FQHCs, and other similar facilities. Fifteen of
them work in Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) designated rural areas.
Dental therapists work under the general supervision of a dentist and are part of the dental team.
Data from Minnesota shows that when a private practitioner hires a dental therapist, the dentist is
freed up to work at the top of his or her scope of practice. Consequently, dentists can perform
more complex procedures, increasing practice income and profitability. Please contact me if you
would like to review the studies that demonstrate this. Dentists who do not want dental therapy
do not have to hire them. However, dentists who do want to employ all tools available need to be
able to incorporate dental therapists as part of their delivery team.
The fundamental premise of this discussion is that the dental care delivery system in this country
is broken for approximately 190,000,000+ people who cannot access the system for a variety of
reasons. Therefore, we need to examine some of the reasons for this problem and look at
solutions or approaches to address the problem. Dental Therapy is one of the approaches that is
evidence based and that is working internationally and in the United States.
Across the country, states are increasingly looking to dental therapists to improve access to care.
Dental therapy has bipartisan support across the country. Dental therapists have the potential to
significantly improve access to care and transform for the better how dental care is delivered and
managed. Thank you for this opportunity to support House Bill 2139.

Sincerely,
Frank Catalanotto, DMD

