Testimony in Support of HB2139
House Health and Human Services
February 14, 2017
Good afternoon Mister Chairman and members of the committee. Thank you for the opportunity
to submit written testimony in support of HB 2139. The Kansas Association for the Medically
Underserved (KAMU) is a member of the Kansas Dental Project, and our member safety net
clinics strongly encourage you to pass legislation allowing Kansas safety net clinics to hire
dental therapists.
Most people like us have the luxury of getting dental check-ups every six months with cleanings
and preventive treatments to ensure good oral health. Should a cavity sneak in on us, it isn’t too
big of a problem. We can have it quickly treated, often fitting the appointment within our
normal work day. However, this isn’t the case for many Kansans. Unfortunately, many have not
had preventive care in years, if ever, due to lack of insurance and access to providers of dental
care.
Over the past several years, Kansas safety net clinics have worked hard and dedicated resources
to help fill this gap in care. The sad truth is that, as the system currently stands, our clinics
can’t serve all the patients in need of dental care, and it may be getting worse. In 2015, 22
safety net clinics that provide dental care treated more than 88,000 patients. They also treated
thousands of kids in schools across the state. In 2016, all Medicaid providers received a 4%
reduction in reimbursement. Due to this, several Kansas dentists that previously served people
enrolled in Medicaid, decided no longer to treat them any longer or would not accept new
patients. In communities like Hays, that lost their only private Medicaid dentist, this left the
safety net clinic in the area trying to absorb 3,000 children. Given the fact that the need for
services far exceeds current capacity, you can imagine how these dental providers are stretched
thin trying to fix a gaping wound that has left our fellow Kansans suffering and in pain. Dental
therapists can help close the gap and heal the system.
HB 2139 allows the creation of a mid-level practitioner, but don’t let the term “mid-level” fool
you. “Mid-level” does not mean substandard training or inferior care. Dental therapists must be
registered dental hygienists (RDH) who obtain advanced education and training at programs
accredited by the Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA). CODA is the accrediting body
for all dental programs, including dentists. Dental therapists will then pass comprehensive
clinical examinations. Having a limited scope of practice will allow them to focus their training
and perfect their skills on the specific procedures they will be licensed to provide. As one would
expect, they will have to pass the same licensing requirements as a dentist does to provide these
same procedures.

KAMU ● 700 SW Jackson ● Topeka, KS 66603 ● (785) 233-8483

The benefits of expanding the dental workforce with dental therapists is substantial on many
levels. Safety net clinics could dramatically increase the number of patients they see by
adding dental therapists to their dental staff. In addition to providing services in the dental
clinic, they could go into underserved areas and give people the dental care they so
desperately need and deserve. For example, providing care to children in schools, will make it
easier for the children and the parents. As it stands now, if a child is found to have cavities
during a school-based preventive visit, they are referred to a dentist. The parent must then take
off work in order to take the child to the dentist. In addition to having to pay for the dental
services (often because they do not have dental insurance), they may also have lost wages, which
means less money for food, rent, clothing and other daily expenses. Dental therapists could fill
the cavity at the school without the parent missing any work. It would also allow the teacher to
have a happier, pain-free, focused student back in the classroom faster. And, the child can do
what is supposed to happen at school – learn!
Let’s take a moment to look at the benefits of a dental therapist that go beyond increased access
to dental care. Kansas has the chance to be the 7th state to utilize these mid-level dental
providers. This could provide a significant boost to our state’s economy. Wichita State
University and Fort Hays State University are eager to embrace this program, welcoming many
more, new students to their schools. Once trained and licensed, dental therapists will plant their
roots in the Sunflower State - paying taxes, buying homes, starting families and contributing to
the economy. Kansas will likely attract dental hygienists from outside of our borders to complete
the dental therapist program and practice within our state. The price tag for this this economic
stimulus? Not a cent needed from the State.
Our member safety net clinics see the need for increased access to dental care every day
and feel the burden of not being able to fully meet that need. They see it on the faces of your
constituents and their children. They see it on the faces of their tremendously dedicated, yet
overworked dentists. HB 2139 will do more than just provide a band-aid solution to our dental
crisis. The addition of a dental therapist to the dental team is a necessity. Without these
additional providers, equipped with the skills to provide high quality and well-supervised
treatment of dental disease, the workforce shortage and the gap in care will continue to worsen.
Help improve access to dental care and heal our state.
Thank you for your sincere consideration of HB 2139. Please pass this bill out of committee and
help fix the state’s painful “toothache” caused by lack of dental care.
Denise Cyzman
KAMU Executive Director

2

