DOUGLAS COUNTY DENTAL CLINIC, INC.
A Non-Profit Community Clinic

Board of Directors
President
Keith Van Horn, DDS
President Elect
Charlotte Marthaler

Secretary
Amy Northrop
Treasurer
Kristen Helling

Members
Sarah Billings, RN, BSN
Donita Bouton, RDH
Lucas Houk
Katherine Iloreta, Pharm D
Chris Koster, MD
Starr Patterson, RDH
Charles Schimmel, J.D.
Galen VanBlaricum, DDS

Executive Director
Julie Branstrom

Dental Director
Dr. Cheryl Biesterfeld, DDS

February 14, 2017
Cheryl Biesterfeld, DDS
Douglas County Dental Clinic, Lawrence, KS
House Bill 2139
House Health and Human Services Committee
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
My name is Cheryl Biesterfeld, DDS. I am the Dental Director of the Douglas
County Dental Clinic, a private non-profit dental clinic in Lawrence,
Kansas. Thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in
support of House Bill 2139.
The Douglas County Dental Clinic is a non-profit safety-net dental clinic
serving the residents of Douglas County, Kansas. Our mission is to make
quality dental care available to underserved populations including the
uninsured, low income and Kansas Medicaid beneficiaries. This mission is
accomplished by providing reduced fee dental care and oral health education
with focus given to the special needs of our patient community.
Our clinic treats patients at or below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level. In
2016 we saw 4,309 individual patients with 8,219 total dental
appointments. 31% of our patients are uninsured, and of that population 74%
are living at or below the federal poverty level. Uninsured patients at our clinic
pay on a sliding fee scale. The fees we charge 74% of our self-pay patients (the
lowest fee level) are discounted by 68%. These fees are far from covering the
cost of care provided. In 2016 our clinic gave away over $420,000 in charitable
care to uninsured patients.
If we were able to add a dental therapist to our team it would be more costeffective to provide reduced-fee care to our uninsured population. Our patients
often operate in crisis mode, and don't access preventive care because they are
unable to afford it. I am aware there are many counties in Kansas that have
even more severe access to care issues than Douglas County, and I do think that
recruiting dental therapists to those provider shortage areas will improve access
to care.
I support dental therapists because they will improve the dental health of the
numerous Kansans who are living with untreated disease, dental pain, and
infection. Thank you for the opportunity to support House Bill 2139.
Sincerely,
Cheryl Biesterfeld, DDS
2210 Yale Rd. Lawrence, KS 66049
Phone: 785-312-7770 / Fax: 785-312-9447
Website: www.dcdclinic.org ● Email: director@dcdclinic.org

