105 W. 13th Street
Hays, KS 67601
Phone: 785-621-4990
Fax: 785-628-8719
www.firstcareclinic.com

Oral Testimony on:
HB 2139 – Licensure of Dental Therapist

Presented to:
House Health and Human Services Committee

By:
Bryan R. Brady, Chief Executive Officer of First Care Clinic and Board President of the Kansas
Association for the Medically Underserved
Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee:
I am Bryan Brady, CEO of the First Care Clinic and Board President of the Kansas Association
for the Medically Underserved. I appreciate the opportunity to present oral testimony about
Dental Therapists and how it would impact my clinic and the residents of Northwest Kansas.
First Care Clinic is part of a network represented by the Kansas Association of the Medically
Underserved that provides access to affordable dental care. Included in this network are 22
safety net clinics that employ 40 dentists, with an additional 26 volunteer dentists. My clinic is
in Hays, KS and serves some of the most vulnerable populations in Northwest Kansas. We
provide comprehensive dental services to all regardless of ability to pay and by doing this we
save the healthcare system costly emergency room visits by seeing patients that no one else will
accept. For these patients finding a dentist can be more than a challenge, it can be almost
impossible and it has truly become more challenging over the last few months. At my clinic
finding qualified dentists who want to live in Western Kansas presents a huge barrier in
providing care. Our clinic is fully staffed with two dentists; we are now on month thirteen of
having only one dentist and unfortunately there is no end in sight. We work with multiple
recruiting firms to assist us in our efforts of finding qualified providers but have yet to find a
second dentist to help serve our patients. In the past when we could recruit we often find that
they come only for the loan repayment and leave after their obligations are fulfilled, leaving us
with a revolving door of dentists and an expensive recruiting bill every 2-3 years.
Another challenge we face is that we were recently notified that a local dentist was going to stop
taking KanCare patients. This dentist has stopped providing care for nearly 3,000 KanCare
beneficiaries. The problem with this is twofold: not only are there 3,000 patients that do not
have a dentist and are turning to my clinic for help, but this local dentist was our only source of
sedation dentistry in the county for us to refer to and they are no longer willing to provide these

services to KanCare patients. This dentist cited the 4% provider cut as the reason for their
decision.
This is only one story from the across the state but I assure you there are more stories where
many Kansans are going without needed dental care because of a lack of dentists. Currently
there are 83% of Kansas counties without enough dental providers. The problem multiplies
when you look at KanCare beneficiaries and uninsured patients. Currently there are only two
clinics in the northwest part of the State that will accept anyone regardless of their ability to pay.
I feel there is a solution to ease the dental provider shortage we are currently facing. It’s called a
Dental Therapist. A mid-level provider that can practice under the supervision of a dentist and
perform cleanings, fillings and simple extractions. Does this sound familiar to you? It should
because in 1976 certification for advanced nursing practice was instituted in Kansas. In Western
Kansas, there would be no way that healthcare could be provided the way it is now without the
use of a midlevel provider. Nurse practitioners provide high quality healthcare and are cost
effective. In some rural towns in Western Kansas, Nurse Practitioners even run the emergency
room because it is not feasible to recruit enough physicians to staff the emergency room. The
Dental Therapist is the solution to ease the similar dental workforce shortage and provide
Kansans access to high-quality dental services.
The time is now to create a Dental Therapist in Kansas. Allow dental practices in Kansas to use
the midlevel provider to expand the care they are providing. In a time where costs are exceeding
revenues, why not vote for a bill that uses a cost-effective model for providing dental care while
creating new jobs in Kansas.
I respectfully urge you to pass HB 2139 out of committee. Thank you for your time and
consideration.
Sincerely,

Bryan R. Brady
Chief Executive Officer

