February 14, 2017
Dr. Becky M. Smith, DDS
Comments to the House Committee on Health and Human Services (HB 2079)
My name is Dr. Becky M. Smith. I am an Associate Clinical Professor at the University of Missouri-Kansas
City School of Dentistry. I am on a team of faculty teaching the curriculum for the Extended Care Permit
III in the state of Kansas. Throughout this document, I am speaking as an individual.
This is a great opportunity for Kansas as they are leading the way with the extended care permit license
for their hygienists. The licensing includes additionally trained hygienists, under general supervision, to
perform such procedures as: identify and removing of decay with hand instruments, placing temporary
restorations, adjusting dentures, placing soft relines, checking for sore spots, labeling dentures,
smoothing sharp teeth with a slow speed handpiece, and extracting primary teeth that are partially
exfoliated with “class 4” mobility (as the law states). These procedures are to be performed in youth
shelters, foster care homes, schools, as long as the children are dentally underserved. Other locations
include longer-term care units, adult care homes, state institutions or community senior services.
One of the duties of the ECP III hygienists is to perform decay removal with hand instruments and place
temporary fillings. This procedure is known as “Atraumatic Restorative Treatment” or “ART”. It began
approximately 25 years ago in Tanzania, as a concept to manage decay in areas that had little to no
access to dental care. In the 1990’s, decay was excavated and temporized using glass ionomers
(Frencken, Leal and Navarro 2012).
ART is an example of Minimally Invasive Dentistry (MID). This concept is ultraconservative in the
approach for treatment of cavitated lesions. MID preserves as much sound tooth structure as possible
and with hand instrumentation, more dental tissue can be preserved. The main difference between ART
and MID is that ART uses hand instruments only (Frencken and Leal 2010).
In 2010, Frencken stated “the ART approach have been investigated extensively and outcomes have
shown that it can be considered an economical and effective method for presenting and controlling
carious lesion development in vulnerable populations.” A study by Carvaloho, Sampiaio, Diniz, Bonecker
and van Amerongen in 2010 concluded that there are similar survival rates in ART of class II with and
without isolation techniques.
Studies have shown success rates ranging from 43.4% to 96.7% for class I restorations and 12.2% to
83.3% in class II restorations. Failures in Franca’s 2011 study included lost or partially lost restorations or
gross marginal defects. The lost or partially lost fillings were 40% of all failures in the first year and 92%
in the second year. These studies were performed in China, Syria, Kuwait, Turkey, Suriname and Kenya
(Franca, Colares, and Amergoren 2011). The United States has yet to publish studies in the ART
technique.
A systematic review, from Mickenautsch and Yengopal in 2012, compared 18 trials of ART and
conventional amalgam restorations. The results were very positive in using the ART technique. They
concluded that the failure rate of ART was similar to that of amalgam after periods longer than one
year (Mickenautsch and Yengopal 2021).
While the United States has yet to publish the outcomes of the ART technique, studies outside of the US
have demonstrated positive results. A study from Oliverira in 2016 demonstrated that a majority of their

US respondents agree that ART is an effective caries treatment. It is with best evidence practices that I
believe that ART will be effective in the access to care issues in the state of Kansas.
References:
1. Carvalho T, Sampaio F, Diniz A, Bonecker M, van Amerongen W “Two years survival rate of Class
II ART restoration in primary molars using two ways to avoid saliva contamination” International
Journal of Paediatric Dentistry 2010 pp. 249-253
2. Franca C, Colares V, Amerogren E “Two year evaluation of the atraumatic restorative treatment
approach in primary molars class I and II restorations” International Journal of Paediatric
Dentistry 2011; 21: 249–253
3. Frencken Jo, Leal S “The correct use of the ART approach” J Appl Oral Sci. 2010;18(1):1-4
4. Frencken Jo, Leal S, Narravo M “Twenty-five-year atraumatic restorative treatment (ART)
approach: a comprehensive overview” Clinical Oral Invest. July 2012
5. Mickenautsch S and Yengopal V “Poor quality evidence suggests that failure rates for
atraumatic restorative treatment and conventional amalgam are similar” EBD 2012:13.2
6. Oliveira DC, Warren JJ, Levy SM, Kolker J, Qian F, Carey C. Acceptance of Minimally Invasive
Dentistry Among US Dentists in Public Health Practices. Oral health & preventive
dentistry2016;14(6):501

