800 SW Jackson St., Suite 1414
Topeka, KS 66612
Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary

Board of Pharmacy

phone: 785-296-4056
fax: 785-296-8420
pharmacy@ks.gov
www.kansas.gov/pharmacy
Sam Brownback, Governor

Testimony concerning HB 2139
House Committee on Health and Human Services
February 14, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy respectfully submits this testimony in opposition to HB 2139, as
written. Specifically, the Board has concerns about the language in Section 2, which would permit dental
therapists to dispense and administer certain medications. Consumer safety should be carefully
considered before granting authority to dispense or administer any medications to patients. Furthermore,
proper supervision, regulation, and oversight are necessary to ensure the protection of the public. The
Board does not feel that each dental therapist would have the requisite education, training or experience
to dispense and administer medications to patients, or that adequate protections are in place. In Kansas,
registered nurses are not even allowed to dispense medications.
Though it does not appear that the bill contemplates prescribing or dispensing of controlled substances,
the Board also seeks clarification on whether this is contemplated in the current legislation or changes to
the structure of dental healthcare in Kansas. Inclusion of controlled substances prompts consideration of
the current opioid epidemic and the involvement of or impact to the Kansas prescription drug
monitoring program, K-TRACS.
The Board suggests an amendment to HB 2139 removing any reference to dispensing or administration
of medications. The Board further recommends that dental therapists at no time be authorized to
dispense or prescribe medications to patients, and be prohibited from dispensing or administering
controlled substances. As a board which regulates dispensing, the Board of Pharmacy has not had
sufficient time to understand any details or nuances of HB 2139 that would assuage concerns.
Respectfully submitted,
Alexandra Blasi, JD, MBA
Executive Secretary

