Sam Brownback
Governor

700 SW Harrison St. Suite 420
Topeka, KS 66603-3929
Phone: (785) 296-3240
Fax: (785) 296-3112
www.ksbsrb.ks.gov

Max L. Foster, Jr.
Executive Director

Testimony of Marcia Simoneau, Social Work Board Member
Kansas Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board
To The Health and Human Services Committee
Regarding HB 2149
February 15, 2017
Good Afternoon Mr. Chairperson and Committee Members,
I am Marcia Simoneau, and I am one of the Board members currently serving on the Behavioral Sciences
Regulatory Board. I am one of the two members that represent the profession of Social Work on the Board. I
am here to offer testimony in opposition to HB 2149.
A. Difference between the Kansas Chapter of the National Association of Social Workers (KNASW) mission
and Behavioral Sciences regulatory Board (BSRB) mission
1. The mission of the BSRB, in accordance with the intent of the Kansas Legislature, is to protect and
serve the consumers of services offered by BSRB licensees, through the issuance of licenses,
resolution of complaints and the creation of appropriate regulations, accomplished through
efficiency, fairness and respect to all those involved.
2. The primary mission of KNASW is to promote and advocate for the practice and profession of social
work in Kansas. Therefore, their mission is directed toward the profession of social work rather
than protecting the public. This is clearly a conflict of interest with the purpose and mission of
BSRB.
B. HB 2149 creates the social work examining committee within the BSRB.
1. The social work examining committee would maintain independent authority concerning licensure
and regulation of social workers under the committee.
2. The BSRB would serve as the administrative agency of the examining committee in all respects.
3. BSRB has been in existence since 1980. Currently the BSRB board is functioning well with members
who do not advocate for any profession or professional organization, but rather acts in the interest
of the public. The BSRB procedures are open and accountable to the public and the licensees. There
are no secrets or hidden agenda. All members work well together and have public protection as
their Number One priority.
4. In addition to the two social work board members there is a social work advisory committee. This
10 member advisory committee is comprised 7 licensed social workers (representing the different
levels of licensure), a public member of the board and the two social work board members who cochair the committee. This committee works on tasks provided to them by the board and provide

input and recommendations to the board from a social work perspective. Additionally, they work
on items that may help educate social work applicants, etc.

5. In the past two years the social work advisory committee has continued the work of a former social
work board member on the development of training of clinical social work supervisors. She worked
on this project for 8 years while she served on the board. Last year the social work advisory
committee sent a survey to all licensed specialist clinical social workers in the state of Kansas
requesting their input regarding the need for training of clinical social work supervisors and
approximately 90 % of the returned surveys were highly in favor of training for clinical social work
supervisors. The BSRB introduced SB 449 in 2016 which included this requirement for training of
clinical social work supervisors. KNASW opposed the training of supervisors and it would appear
this was done without any surveys requesting their members’ input. KNASW testified they were
unable to support the legislation because not all of the professions regulated by BSRB were
required to complete this training. However, they are proposing this bill when no other professions
want to make these changes.
C. The national Association of Social Workers (NASW) membership makes up of approximately 30% of all
social workers in the United States. Therefore, there are approximately 70% of all social workers who
chose not to become a member and are not represented in the national organization. The BSRB has
asked KNASW for information regarding the number of social workers in their organization but they
have declined to provide us with this data.
D. In the United States there are 32 Independent social work boards, of which most are state agencies, 16
composite boards such as Kansas BSRB, and two states have no regulatory boards. However, in these
instances, the Board of Regents oversees the social workers and appoints professionals to provide
guidance for social work. Of the 32 independent social work boards in the United States, none are
governed by the NASW or any other professional organization. Rather, they are a resource to the
boards for information on the social work profession. According to the Association of Social Work
Boards, “In the United States, the work of a regulatory board is a very separate function from the
professional organization”.
E. Difference in Regulatory Body and Professional Association
- Please see handout provided.
F. Mr. Chairperson for the above mentioned reasons I am opposed HB 2149.
In closing, thank you for the opportunity to testify before you. I hope the information I have provided
helps to show the very distinct differences between a regulatory board and a professional association.
I am happy to stand for any questions.

