Sam Brownback
Governor

700 SW Harrison St. Suite 420
Topeka, KS 66603-3929
(785) 296-3240
(785) 296-3112
www.ksbsrb.org

Max L. Foster, Jr.
Executive Director

Testimony of Max Foster, Executive Director
Kansas Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board
To The House Health and Human Services Committee
Regarding HB 2149
February 15, 2017
Good Day Mister Chairperson and Committee Members:
I am Max Foster, the Executive Director of the Kansas Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board (BSRB). Thank
you for the invitation to testify today to brief the committee on the structure of the (BSRB), and to offer
information to the committee as to why the BSRB is opposed to the creation of the social work examining
committee within the BSRB as contained in HB 2149.
What is the BSRB?

The BSRB is the licensing board for most of the state’s mental health professionals including; licensed
psychologists, master level psychologists, clinical psychotherapists, bachelor, master and specialist clinical
level social workers, master and clinical level professional counselors, master and clinical level marriage and
family therapists, bachelor, master and clinical level addiction counselors, assistant behavior analysts and
behavior analysts.
History of the Board

The BSRB traces its origin to 1980 – when the Board of Psychology and the Social Work Board were combined
into one regulatory body that was named the BSRB. In 1987, the regulation of Masters Level
Psychologists and Professional Counselors were added to the BSRB. In 1992, the regulation of Marriage and
Family Therapists became a function of the BSRB. In 2011, regulation of Addiction Counselors was made a
part of the BSRB and effective July 1, 2016 the BSRB started to license Behavioral Analysts.
Board Members

There are twelve individuals who are members of the Board. These individuals serve at the pleasure of the
Governor and serve staggered four year terms. An individual may serve up to a maximum of two terms.
Here is the list of current Board members:
Name

Dr. Grant Edwards, Chair
Cheryl Reynolds, Vice-Chair
Kathy Armstrong
Dr. Barbara Callahan
Jill Craven
Dr. Todd Frye
Kathryn Herzog
Dr. Terry Pfannenstiel
Larry Salmans
Marcia Simoneau
Deb Stidham
Carolyn Szafran

Profession/Public

Psychology
Public Member
Public Member
Psychology
Public Member
Professional Counseling
Public Member
Marriage and Family Therapy
Masters Level Psychology
Social Work
Addiction Counseling
Social Work

Term
nd

2
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
1st
1st

Expiration

2018
2018
2019
2019
2020
2020
2020
2018
2019
2019
2020
2018

My position serves at the pleasure of the Board and I hire and evaluate the staff.
Our Mission

The mission of the BSRB, in accordance with the intent of the Kansas Legislature, is to protect and serve the
consumers of services offered by BSRB licensees, through the issuance of licenses, resolution of complaints
and the creation of appropriate regulations, accomplished through efficiency, fairness and respect to all those
involved.
Professions Licensed
License Type
Psychologist (PhD)

# Licensees
911
911

Associate Social Worker
Bachelors Level Social Worker
Masters Level Social Worker
Clinical Level Social Worker

21
1,758
3,663
2,021
7,463

Professional Counselor
Clinical Professional Counselor

744
555
1,299

Masters Level Psychologist
Clinical Psychotherapist

303
296
599

Marriage and Family Therapist
Clinical Marriage and Family Therapist

355
520
875

Addiction Counselor
Masters Level Addiction Counselor
Clinical Addiction Counselor

744
215
532
1,491

Assistant Behavior Analyst
Behavior Analyst

15
111
126

Total Licensees

12,764

Note: The professions of Social Worker, Addiction Counselor and Assistant Behavioral Analyst are the only
professions in which a person can obtain a license with only a Bachelor’s degree. A doctoral level Psychologist
and any individual licensed at the “clinical” level may work independently.

2

Agency Budget

The BSRB is funded exclusively with fees. There are no federal funds, nor is there any State General Fund
contained in our funding sources. Ten percent of all revenue received is transferred to the State General Fund
prior to the revenue being made available for agency use.
FY 2017 Level
FY 2018 Level

$733,843
$750,560

It should be noted that 74% of the agency budget is expended for salaries and wages for the agency’s nine
employees.
Advisory Committees

There is an advisory committee to the Board for each profession licensed by the Board. Each advisory
committee is chaired by the Board member for that profession. Other members of the advisory committee could
include educators, and practitioners (active as well as retired). These individuals work on tasks provided to them
by the Board (e.g. regulations) and provide input to the Board from the perspective of that
profession.(e.g. supervisory training requirements). Committee members serve at the pleasure of the
Chairperson of the Board and may serve a maximum of four – two year terms.
Outreach Activities of the Board

We actively participate in national associations for each profession to assure national trends / continuity of
public protection efforts is maintained.
We coordinate an annual roundtable with Kansas educators (university level) from the programs who instruct
potential BSRB licensees. This gives educators the opportunity to bring concerns regarding licensure
requirements to the attention of the Board. This forum provides an open dialogue between all parties involved.
As an example of a product of these roundtable activities was the development of a tri-fold licensing brochure
for new students.
We regularly present information to students in their classroom during their final year of study concerning
licensure requirements and the application process. A general overview of the complaint process is also
discussed at this time. The Board makes it known that we will make ourselves available to all universities who
request such assistance.
Investigation Activity

As far as the enforcement of our statutes and regulations are concerned, FIRST it is the goal of the BSRB to
educate. When educational outreach is unsuccessful, and violations of our statutes and regulations occur, the
Board initiates investigative activity.
All reports of alleged violation are reviewed, and if a determination is made to proceed with the investigation,
the case is docketed. The BSRB has a committee composed of 5 current Board members that reviews the
information presented by the work of our Special Investigator, and usually makes one of three decisions:
•

The facts do not support a violation

If the facts do not support a violation, the committee usually dismisses the case without further action.
The committee can issue a cautionary letter.
•

The facts do support a violation

If the facts do support a violation, the committee can issue a cautionary letter for a non-disciplinary
closure, propose a Consent Agreement and Order, propose a Summary Proceeding Order or propose an
adjudicative hearing.
3

•

The committee does not have sufficient evidence to make a decision

The case is returned to the investigator for follow up if the committee does not have sufficient evidence
to make a decision.
Examples of Violations

•
•
•
•
•

Practicing without a license
Falsifying continuing education requirements or renewing license prior to completing all CEU
requirements.
Failing to report child or elder abuse in a reasonable length of time
Exercising undue influence over or making sexual advances toward or engaging in physical intimacies
with any client
Revealing information, a confidence, or a secret of any client, or failing to protect the confidences,
secrets or information contained in a client’s records. (except when disclosure is required by law; failure
to disclose presents a clear and present danger to the health or safety of an individual or the public; or if
the licensee is a party to a civil, criminal or disciplinary investigation in which case disclosure is limited
to that action).

Sanctions Available

The Board has statutory authority to revoke, suspend, limit, condition, refuse to issue a license, or refuse to
renew a license. It can also assess an administrative penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 and assess
actual costs. In addition, it can revoke the license or registration when the license has been voluntarily
surrendered when an investigation or charges of misconduct are pending.

Brief Summary of HB 2149
HB 2149 creates the social work examining committee within the BSRB. This committee would consist of five
members who are licensed to engage in the practice of social work and two members who represent the public.
Committee members would be appointed by the governor. The bill outlines specific duties and responsibilities
of the social work examining committee concerning licensure and regulation of social workers under the social
workers licensure act. The BSRB shall serve as the administrative and enforcement agency of the examining
committee in all respects. The number of members of the BSRB would be reduced from 12 to 10 as a result of
the elimination of the board members who currently represent the profession of social work.

Specific Comments Regarding Provisions Contained in HB 2149
Will there need to be a clear delineation of services provided by BSRB staff?
HB 2149 has a provision that states the BSRB shall serve as the administrative and enforcement agency of the
examining committee in all respects. Currently, BSRB staff members handle all regulatory functions for seven
mental health professions. There isn’t one staff member that works exclusively in the area of social work
licensure and regulation. Under the provision of HB 2149 will it be necessary for staff to identify and keep track
of specific job tasks associated only with the profession of social work? It is not possible for two boards to
provide authority over and direction to a staff.

4

What administrative functions will be performed by the social work examination committee?
For example, what input will the social work examination committee have in the selection of BSRB employees?
Specifically, regarding the position of Executive Director of the BSRB, will the social work examination
committee participate in the process of selecting the Executive Director and evaluating his/ her performance?
How will general policy decisions concerning the function of the BSRB be handled and maintained?
Since the social work examining committee will reside within the BSRB, will there be a requirement for
specific policies that only relate to the social work profession? Will the social work examining committee desire
input into all general BSRB policies and procedures? Will this lead to duplication of efforts and services?
HB 2149 appears to imply that only social workers can regulate the social work profession.
One of the current strengths of the BSRB is that there are eight licensed professionals and four public members
who currently serve on the board. These previously identified board members provide an excellent
representation of a diverse scope of mental health disciplines – and combined with the presence of the four
members representing the public (who are truly public and independent) - we can be assured that the primary
mission of this agency – public protection – is always first and foremost.
Promotion versus regulation.
It is essential that the primary function for a regulatory board to exist is never forgotten. Recently, in the State
of North Carolina, the NC Dental Board – which was made up primarily of board members elected by dentists
in North Carolina – was found to be in violation of antitrust laws because they were more interested in selfpromotion rather than consumer protection. They were also found to not have sufficient state oversight of their
activity. As a result, regulatory boards across the country have been urged to review this decision and assess the
impact on their particular board structure. The current structure of the BSRB, in which individuals express
interest in serving on the board, and contact the Governor’s office, rather than have their name submitted by a
professional organization to the Governor, provides for a separation of self-promotion versus consumer
protection.
There is a possibility of an increase in future costs if HB 2149 is passed.
Passage of HB 2149 would engage the possibility of the other professions we regulate to follow suit with their
own stand-alone board. If this occurs, future costs would rise, and public protection would not necessarily be
heightened.
Dual licensed individuals should not have two boards to deal with.
The BSRB has 1018 individuals who have more than one license with this agency. 506 of these individuals are
social workers. Currently, licensure activity, investigative activity and policy guidelines are consistent for each
profession licensed. In disciplinary matters involving dually licensed social workers, conflicting disciplinary
actions may occur. Creation of a potential separate set of rules and policies for social work is not needed and
could create confusion with dual licensed individuals.
The BSRB is opposed to HB 2149
In closing, Mister Chairman and Committee Members, I wish to thank you for the opportunity to testify before
you to provide an overview of the operation and activity of the Kansas Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board
as well as give you information as to why the Board is opposed to the creation of the social work examining
committee within the BSRB as contained in HB 2149.
At this time I will be happy to stand for questions.

5

