House Committee on Federal and State Affairs
Testimony by Forrest Knox in OPPOSITION to

HB 2150
Prohibiting the carrying of concealed firearms in certain buildings.
February 2, 2017
Chairman Barker and Committee Members:
It’s a privilege to bring written testimony about the Kansas statutes related to security in publicly owned
buildings. I stand in strong opposition to the current legislation being considered, HB 2150, which would
exempt the KU Med Center from providing for the security of the occupants in the facility, or in the absence of
security, from being compelled to allow those in the facility to provide for their own defense.
I OPPOSE HB 2150 because it is ANTI-SECURITY. It would allow the occupants of public buildings, who have a
legitimate need and right to be there, to be disarmed without any obligation by the facility to provide for the
security of those law-abiding occupants. It would allow criminals easy access to a building full of disarmed
citizens, with a notice of such on every door.
Kansas statutes now allow state and local governments to restrict guns in their buildings, disarming citizens
only if they provide adequate security for them. Since this law took effect in 2013, most such buildings in
Kansas allow concealed carry. There has been no negative effect. Governing bodies determined where
security was required and provided the security. Everywhere else they simply took down the signs. IT HAS
BEEN A NON-ISSUE!
Over the last couple decades, all 50 states have adopted concealed carry. During this period, no significant
trend related to increased handgun accidents, increased crime rates, or increased suicides is seen. Actually,
crime has dropped significantly. We have had huge increases of guns in the hands of law-abiding citizens, and
THERE HAS BEEN NO “WILD, WILD WEST” as was claimed would happen by those in opposition. The most
significant crime now is in the cities where firearms are most restricted. The lowest crime rates are in the
areas of the country where guns are most available to citizens.
Signs do not stop criminals; they only stop law abiding citizens. But, concealed guns in the hands of lawabiding citizens stop criminals. Often no crime is even attempted by the criminal who thinks some bystander
may have a gun. It is in the so-called “GUN FREE ZONES,” where signs are posted, that criminals feel confident
that no one has a gun to resist them.
It has been my observation that in recent years as Kansas has adopted licensed concealed carry, the public
building security act, legalization of the carry of all knives (even concealed, including switchblades), and
permit-less concealed carry of firearms, this has been a non-issue. There is no blood running in the streets.
Crime is not up. Accidents are not common. Suicide (which is definitely an issue that needs attention) has not
jumped.

As I have sought out the data, I have seen many accounts of crime being averted, lives being saved, rapes
being stopped, etc. by citizens that have a ready means to protect themselves. We usually don’t hear about
these because they are not news worthy. There’s nothing to hear about. The crime did not occur.
A key point I’ve learned in giving Kansas citizens a ready means to defend themselves, is that some elected
officials, some government bureaucrats, some law enforcement officers are more afraid of law abiding
citizens with guns than of the criminals. They’ve actually told me this. It is very concerning to me that these
government agents don’t trust you and me, even as government has no duty to protect us personally.
This is about trust. This is about the Constitution. America is exceptional in this world because only in America
does the government trust its citizens. Only in America are basic rights guaranteed to its citizens. The #1 duty
of government is to protect the liberty of the citizen. Liberty is what has allowed Americans to prosper at a
level far beyond any other nation.
A police state is the only alternative to citizens providing for their own security. History shows us the danger
in this. The chief murderer of law abiding citizens throughout history has been their own governments. The
nations who have restricted the citizens’ access to a means of providing for their own security, are the nations
who have committed genocide against their own people.
In America, government trusts citizens. Citizens don’t trust government.
Recently you swore an oath to uphold the Constitution. Please protect my liberty!
If I can be of any further assistance to you, please don’t hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

Forrest Knox
Rural Wilson County, Kansas
senatorforrestknox@gmail.com

