Hi there! My name is Sara Weber and I have been fighting intractable epilepsy for 11 years now. I have
lesions on both of my temporal lobes and 6 different kinds of seizures, so it makes it very hard to treat. I
have been on every medication cocktail, multiple treatments, diets, surgeries...my epileptologist and I have
tried everything and it either aggravates the seizures worse or doesn't help at all, and I have been
traumatized by some pharmaceuticals. I have 20-50 seizures a month, usually leaving me with multiple
injuries usually leading to the emergency room at least once a month. I have 2 daughters that I can't commit
to fully because of this and it breaks my heart. Especially when my 7 year old describes the seizures to me.
It doesn't even scare her anymore. ...she has dealt with it her whole life so she knows exactly what to do. I
have a wonderful support system, but I still can't help but feel like a burden and complete inconvenience
when I can't even bathe alone or leave the house alone. I have been using CBD for 1 1/2 years, since I saw
a doctor in Colorado and he recommended that I use CBD to heal the lesions, but stated that I need high
THC to treat and prevent the seizures. The lesions will continue to grow as long as I continue to have these
seizures and they continue to go untreated. I oppose the CBD only bill very strongly because not only me,
but many other patients need the full plant. My doctors and pharmacist have even written testimonies for me
stating how much I need medical cannabis to not only stop the seizures, but to heal the multiple lesions on
my brain. This gives me so much hope for not only my future, but for my babies and for everyone else
suffering. I have 2 daughters, ages 3 and 7. I love cooking and baking (when I can, and especially for other
people) I don't get out much since I don't drive, but I do get out once a week for church unless I am in really
bad shape, which I usually am for 1 week of the month, but they understand and are very supportive. I went
to Haiti once on a medical mission and I love supporting missionaries. I hold a big fundraiser for Haiti every
year. I got a bachelor's degree in nutrition science and I would love to return to Haiti to give some classes on
basic nutrition :)
I have the best family, church, and community anyone could ask for, which is I haven't decided to move
yet, but I have come very close. If it doesn't pass this year I will be moving to my Grandma's in Michigan,
which breaks my heart, but I have exceeded my options here in Kansas.I got so blessed with an amazing
support system, I just hope and pray that I get some help and support from my state because I know my
babies and I aren't ready to uproot, and we shouldn't have to move to live a quality life and for me to be
seizure free. I want to thank you for your time and I hope to hear back from you! God bless!
-Sara
My phone number is ​(785) 325-2882​ call anytime!

