Kansas Association of
Chiefs of Police

Kansas Sheriffs
Association

Kansas Peace Officers
Association

PO Box 780603
Wichita, KS 67278
(316)733-7301

PO Box 1122
Pittsburg, KS 66762
(620)230-0864

PO Box 2592
Wichita, KS 67201
(316)722-8433

Testimony to the Health and Human Services Committee
In Opposition to HB2152
March 15, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Committee Members,
The concept of “medical hemp” as presented in this bill is so abundant with issues it is difficult to know
where to start. It is logical to first focus on the “hemp” label as used in this bill. This is very clearly not
really a hemp bill but a medical marijuana bill with THC limits. Hemp is a part of the cannabis plant.
“Hemp” and marijuana are actually separate parts of the species of plant known as cannabis. Under
federal law, Congress defined marijuana to focus on those parts of the cannabis plant that are the source
of tetrahydrocannabinols (THC). THC is the hallucinogenic substance in marijuana that causes the
psychoactive effect or “high.” The marijuana portions of the cannabis plant include the flowering tops
(buds), the leaves, and the resin of the cannabis plant. The remainder of the plant — stalks and sterilized
seeds — is what some people refer to as “hemp.” “. . .hemp and marijuana are both parts of the same
plant and hemp cannot be produced without producing marijuana.”1

You can see in the above reference when THC is the focus it is really marijuana we are talking about. In
HB2152, there is a requirement of maximum THC level of 3%. There is no requirement of a minimal
amount of CBD to be present. In fact, HB2152 doesn’t require even trace amounts of cannabidiol CBD
to be present. This indicates to us the authors of this bill are clearly aiming at THC legalization and not
CBD legalization. Other states that have low-THC marijuana laws do not refer to it as “medical hemp.”
They call it “low-THC marijuana.” Most also specify a minimum amount of CBD, the chemical from
the marijuana plant considered to have potential of benefit. The reference to hemp in this bill, in our
opinion, is a wolf in sheep’s clothing. To illustrate this point, consider the up to 3% THC levels in this
bill. In Florida, their THC limit is 0.8% and their CBD minimum is 10%.2 Mississippi requires no more
than 0.5% THC and no less than 15% CBD.3 Missouri requires no more than 0.3% THC and no less than
5% CBD.4 North Carolina requires 0.3% THC and at least 10% CBD. South Carolina requires no more
than 0.9% THC and more than 15 % CBD.5 And the list goes on. Even minimal research shows the
effectiveness of the CBD is dependent on the high ratio to THC levels.

1

DEA News Release. DEA Clarifies Status of Hemp in the Federal Register. 10/9/2001
Florida Department of Health, FAQ on low-THC Cannabis. (http://www.floridahealth.gov/programs-and-services/office-ofcompassionate-use/_documents/faq.pdf#search=%22faq%20low-thc%22)
3
National Conference of State Legislatures; State Medical Marijuana Laws. 1/8/16.
http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/state-medical-marijuana-laws.aspx
4
Same.
5
Same.
2

Some states have passed laws that do not create the head shop sales culture or the problematic physician
“prescription” process that circumvents established prescription drug laws.6 Some states such as
Alabama, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, North Carolina, and Tennessee only provide for research in
state university hospitals.7 This assures the handling of these scheduled drugs in a safe and controlled
research and medical environment. Some states are now requiring these products to be dispensed
through pharmacies. (Minnesota, New York, and Connecticut)
In addition to that, GW Pharmaceuticals is concluding final testing on pharmacy grade CBD oil
medication. THC based medications already are available through pharmacies. I would hope we would
all agree the quality control, and more importantly the strength of the desired substances, are better
controlled through existing pharmacy processes than through corner shops with only periodic random
testing of the drugs they are selling. It is very likely this pharmaceutical grade CBD will be available
through normal existing medical processes before the proposals in this bill can be fully implemented.
HB2152 proposes a high THC content, no CBD requirement, creates non-pharmaceutical headshop type
store fronts, and a new “prescription” process specific to this product. All of this is unnecessary.
Scheduled chemicals and compounds used for medical treatment should all flow through the established
pharmaceutical or research avenues, not through backdoor experimentation.
The bill also allows for marijuana edibles. Colorado found this to be a major issue with overdoses and
access to children. This doesn’t seem like a good step for something that is supposed to be medicine.
Aside from those obvious efforts to minimize control of abuse of these substances, there are direct law
enforcement concerns:
LAW ENFORCEMENT OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
The legalization of cannabis in any form has tremendous implications for law enforcement.
1. Law enforcement must retrain, develop new policy and formulate new investigative
techniques to enforce remaining laws relating to cannabis. State legalization creates a conflict
between state and federal laws on cannabis. But enforcement must continue for violations
that do not fall under the new legalized parameters. These investigations are complicated as
some possession is legal while others are not.
2. Probable cause for searches and arrests become clouded requiring error on the side of caution
by not arresting or not searching unless clarity exists. New standards and procedures must be
developed by law enforcement leaders, district and city attorneys and policymakers clarifying
the criteria for determining an illegal marijuana operation and providing guidance for
acceptable criteria for marijuana based search warrants.
3. Once marijuana is seized, if later investigation reveals the possession did not violate state
law, a dilemma is created for law enforcement in returning the property to the person from
whom it was seized which would still violate federal law.
4. Drug dogs must be retrained or replaced. Drug dogs are trained to “hit” on various drugs.
Unfortunately, they can’t tell us what drug they smell. So, dogs that have been trained to
detect drugs including marijuana are rendered useless since the mere detection of marijuana
may not indicate a criminal violation. This will result in not only an expense, but also a
degradation of our ability to locate and seize other illegal drugs.

6
7

Same.
Same.

5. Enforcement of marijuana violations under the newly created laws and regulations will
require a multi-team approach involving law enforcement, prosecutors, zoning professionals,
fire inspectors, building inspectors, food inspectors, code compliance inspectors, medical
professionals and others.
6. Liability issues will be difficult as law enforcement walks a thin line between potential
violations of the rights of those who can legally possess and being liable for not taking action
which may lead to harm to others when encountering a person who is not legally authorized
to possess marijuana.
7. Law requirement analysis of percentage content of THC and CBD create an enormous
burden on crime labs. Quantitative analysis requires 7 times longer to analyze and requires
additional equipment and training. The additional cost is very significant.
There is also growing evidence of the damage legalized medical marijuana availability presents for our
youth and for public safety. The attached data is from the Colorado experience. I have intentionally not
provided post 2014 data in this discussion because that is when Colorado passed their recreational
marijuana law. Medical marijuana was first allowed in Colorado in 2010 and the data shows the effect of
medical marijuana legalization, not recreational marijuana legalization. So the data reflects only there
experience during the period when medical marijuana was legalized, not full recreational legalization.
We encourage you to carefully consider the data we have presented and the potential unintended
consequence, and to not recommend HB2152 for passage.

Ed Klumpp
eklumpp@cox.net

PUBLIC SAFETY CONSIDERATIONS
In the following discussion, keep in mind Colorado commercialized medical marijuana (dispensaries
started opening) in 2010 and legalized commercialization of marijuana (recreational use) began
January 1, 2014.
1. How will legalization for either medical or recreational use effect our children?
I learned in Colorado the data does indicate an increase in drug use over the same years marijuana was
legal for medical purposes. It is too early to see an impact from legalization for recreational purposes,
but there doesn’t seem to be any signs legalization has no impact or a positive impact on use by
children.
2. Colorado Youth Marijuana Use: In 2011, the national average for youth 12 to 17 years old
considered “current” marijuana users was 7.64 percent which was the highest average since 1981.
The Colorado average percent was 10.

3. How will it affect highway safety? Advocates often site the decrease in fatalities in Colorado since
legalization for medical purposes and again in 2014 with commercial recreational legalization. What
they don’t usually reveal is that traffic fatalities have been dropping in most states even those that
haven’t legalized commercialization of marijuana. They also usually don’t mention that while the
number of total fatalities is dropping, the number of drug related fatalities is increasing.
Colorado Driving Fatalities: From 2006 to 2011, traffic fatalities decreased in Colorado 16 percent,
but fatalities involving drivers testing positive for marijuana increased 114 percent.

4. Does marijuana legalization create more health emergencies?
Colorado Emergency Room – Marijuana Admissions: From 2005 through 2008 there was an
average of 741 visits per year to the emergency room in Colorado for marijuana-related incidents
involving youth. That number increased to 800 visits per year between 2009 and 2011.

5. Does legalization create more unintentional drug poisoning?
Colorado Marijuana-Related Exposure Cases: From 2005 through 2008, the yearly average number
of marijuana-related exposures for children ages 0 to 5 years was 4. For 2009 through 2012, that
number increased 200 percent to an average of 12 per year.

