Testimony in Support of HB2031 – The Palliative Care and Quality of Life Advisory Council
Committee on Healthy and Human Services
Tuesday, February 07, 2017
1:30 PM Room 546-S, Capitol Building, Topeka, KS

Donna M. Bales (dbales@cox.net)
President and CEO
Kansas LIFE (Living Initiatives For End-of-Life Care) Foundation
Kansas Hospice and Palliative Care Organization
Wichita, KS
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
As an organization that is totally committed to quality of care for all Kansans receiving hospice and
palliative care, we add our voice to those in favor of House Bill 2031 to create the palliative care and
quality of life interdisciplinary advisory council. We see every day the need for Kansans to be informed
about and understand options in care. Our work is to assure that citizens’ wishes in care are honored. It
is important that palliative care, in order to be provided correctly, be understood by professional
caregivers and citizens alike; and that there be appropriate services to support quality of life.
This measure can also assist healthcare professionals by further promoting and demonstrating the
benefits of team based care and constant attention being given to patient’s involvement in achieving
better outcomes.
The bill is inclusive of varied professional perspectives. In addition, we encourage the inclusion of a
representative of the patient/family/caregiver perspective, and believe that there are individuals who
could fill this role well and bring a perspective that is important. A hallmark of excellent palliative care is
including patient/family in the planning process, and we believe this to be an important addition here as
well.
The LIFE Project Foundation, doing business as the Association of Kansas Hospices and Palliative Care
Organization, works every day in the provision of hospice and palliative care to Kansans. We look
forward to being a part of this effort and to supporting quality in palliative care in Kansas.
Thank you for the opportunity to share this with you. And thank you for your work and consideration of
this important issue.
Respectfully Submitted
Sandy Kuhlman
Chair of the Board, Kansas LIFE Project Foundation, Kansas Hospice and Palliative Care Organization
Donna Bales
President and CEO, Kansas LIFE Project Foundation, Kansas Hospice and Palliative Care Organization

