Submitted via e-mail: dan.hawkins@house.ks.gov
February 9, 2017
Daniel Hawkins, Chair Health and Human Services Committee
Kansas State Capitol
300 SW 10th Street
Room 521-E
Topeka, KS 66612
RE:

HB 2195

Dear Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Health and Human Services Committee:
On behalf of ASHA’s members, I am writing to support House Bill (HB) 2195, which would
transfer the duties and administration of the Kansas Board of Examiners in Fitting and
Dispensing of Hearing Instruments to the Secretary of the Kansas Department of Aging and
Disability Services (KDADS).
The American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA) is the national professional,
scientific, and credentialing association for 186,000 members and affiliates who are audiologists;
speech-language pathologists; speech, language, and hearing scientists; audiology and speechlanguage pathology support personnel; and students. Over 1,750 of our members reside in
Kansas.
Currently, hearing instrument specialists are issued a license from a freestanding board of their
peers. Consumers with hearing loss who seek hearing aids from these individuals have little
recourse if the service provided is unsatisfactory. The board has part-time administrative
assistance and no website to determine how to file a complaint. Subsuming the board under
KDADS would provide a level of transparency and reliability that is currently unavailable to
consumers in the state. For most individuals with disabilities, including those with hearing loss,
adding the level of oversight provided by KDADS would reassure consumers that these service
providers would be held accountable to the same standards as other licensed professionals in the
state.
Hearing instrument specialists are licensed in all states, but the license does not always
specifically outline their scope of practice. In addition, there is no uniformity in licensure
requirements, such as education and training expectations. In Kansas, hearing instrument
specialists must be 21 years of age, have a high school diploma or equivalent, and have passed
an examination to be licensed. Providing state oversight would allow KDADS to ensure that
uniform standards are required and maintained for hearing instrument specialists in the state.
Most licensure boards, including the Kansas Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology Board,
have state oversight. In light of a decision by the United States Supreme Court in the North
Carolina Dental Board case, which held that a state regulatory board cannot be controlled by
market participants without active supervision, the state legislature should enact HB 2195 in

2200 RESEARCH BOULEVARD

•

ROCKVILLE, MARYLAND 20850-3289

•

301-296-5700 VOICE OR TTY

•

www.asha.org

ASHA Comments
February 9, 2017
Page 2

order to ensure that the requirements of the Supreme Court decision are upheld. See North
Carolina State Board of Dental Examiners v. FTC)
We urge you to support HB 2195, which would provide state oversight, transparency, and
consumer protection for the citizens with hearing loss in the state of Kansas.
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments. Should you have any questions or need
further information, please contact Janet Deppe, ASHA’s director of state advocacy, at
jdeppe@asha.org or by phone at 301-296-5668.
Sincerely,

Gail J. Richard, PhD, CCC-SLP
2017 ASHA President
cc:

Susie Ternes, Executive Director, Kansas Speech-Language-Hearing Association
ksha@ksha.org
Lydia Meiss
Lydia.meiss@house.ks.gov

