February 15,2017
RE: House Bill 2206
Dear Committee Chairperson and Ranking Member,
My name is Nathan Fawson, and I am the Executive Director for Southeast Kansas Mental Health Center.
I appreciate the opportunity to provide testimony in support of HB 2066. I hope that my testimony will
explain current telemedicine restrictions among health insurance companies and advocate for
telemedicine parity. Healthcare access, quality, and cost are all improved with the availability and
delivery of telemedicine. These benefits are especially pronounced in rural areas where there is a
shortage of healthcare providers and specialty care.
As a six-county Community Mental Health Center providing an array of behavioral health services in
rural southeast Kansas, telemedicine has proven to be essential in providing timely, affordable and
quality treatment to those individuals in need. When permitted and needed, we very effectively and
with strong consumer satisfaction provide televideo psychiatry and therapy to those we serve that
otherwise may suffer from unnecessary mental health challenges and hospitalizations. By providing
medication management and therapy services to our consumers via televideo, we are improving their
access to our treatment, reducing consumer and organization costs, and providing quality services that
help them better manage their mental health needs in their home and community settings, which
reduces the need for a more restricted and expensive level of care such as hospitalization.
Rural southeast Kansas experiences a psychiatry shortage that further warrants the need for
telepsychiatry. Because we serve and have offices in six counties, there are times when providing
telepsychiatry between offices is essential in order to meet consumers’ treatment needs and avoid
unaffordable travel and down time.
Additionally, the capability for our providers to offer telepsychiatry from an office more local to their
home has also proven essential in meeting our consumers’ needs. Just as consumers have personal
challenges that prevent them from traveling long distances to receive specialty care, our providers might
also face similar challenges that prevent them from being able to travel to our offices to deliver face-toface services. Namely, all of our psychiatry providers commute 3 to 4 hours round trip from their homes
to provide in-office face-to-face services or office-to-office telepsychiatry. Our consumers have greatly
benefited from our providers being able to offer telepsychiatry from their home office when needed
versus having to cancel appointments due to the provider’s inability to travel 3 to 4 round trip hours to
our office. Such cancelations would likely result in lengthy rescheduling delays while compromising
consumers mental health treatment and prescription needs and increasing the risk of costly and
unnecessary hospitalization.
For example, approximately 5 years ago our Medical Director of 25+ years experienced a significant life
changing illness amongst a family member (wife) that required him to be within close proximity to
provide support, as needed. As a result, he was no longer able to be so far away from home, preventing
him from providing face-to-face services in our offices. Fortunately, telepsychiatry from his home office
was the solution that allowed him to continue serving our consumers rather than resigning his position.
This would have posed significant risk to our consumers due to the psychiatry shortage we experience in
southeast Kansas.

For more than two years and up until his wife’s passing, our Medical Director devoted his expert care
and treatment to both his beloved wife and our consumers via televideo. He also scheduled periodic inoffice visits with our consumers while arranging for his wife to come with him and endure the long
commute to and from our office. He stands as an exceptional example of one committed to providing
quality, compassionate, and devoted healthcare to all in need. Telepsychiatry has made all this possible.
The greater service tragedy, however, occurred when our Center was informed by an insurance
company that he would no longer be approved to deliver telepsychiatry services to any of their insured
members. Without assessing the effectiveness of our telepsychiatry services to date, they instead
informed us that their policy prohibited our telehealth services. They then approved us to only see their
members face-to-face or refer them to other providers on their panel that were within a 90 mile radius.
However, none of their other panel providers in our service area had psychiatric credentialing and
instead were the very primary care physicians that referred their patients to our psychiatrist for his
expertise in treating and managing complex behavioral health needs and medications.
In response to the insurance company’s telepsychiatry denial, we appealed to the insurance company’s
highest possible clinical and administrative professionals advocating the telepsychiatry needs of their
members. Additionally, we pursued the support of the State of Kansas Insurance Commissioner, the
Association of Community Mental Health Centers of Kansas and other mental health advocates. Only
after a significant passing of time and disruption of services to our consumers, the insurance company
granted an exception to their rules (many of which were clinically unfounded and not in clearly written
policy form) and approved our telepsychiatry services to resume. However, since then we have heard of
many other mental health providers across the state being subject to denial of telehealth services by
insurance companies.
Fighting for telehealth treatment rights of insured members shouldn’t require such painstaking, time
consuming, and costly appeals that result in denials, delays and disruption to services that compromise
people’s lives and wellbeing and place them at risk of hospitalization! Thus, blanket denials of telehealth
services by insurance companies should no longer be tolerated, especially where there is no review of
clinical effectiveness or contradicting evidence that telehealth services do not meet consumers’ needs.
In conclusion, parity between face-to-face and telehealth services is needed to improve people’s
treatment needs and promote wellness rather than the risk of decompensation of health and
hospitalization. Therefore, I plea for legislative support of House Bill 2066 regarding telehealth parity.
Sincerely,

Nathan A. Fawson, Executive Director
Southeast Kansas Mental Health Center
304 N Jefferson, Iola, KS 66749
620-365-8641 (office)
620-365-8642 (fax)
nfawson@sekmhc.org

