Thomas L. Bell
President

To:

House Health and Human Services

From: Chad Austin, Senior Vice President Government Relations
Date: February 16, 2016
Re:

House Bill 2206 - Proponent

The Kansas Hospital Association appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on HB 2206
which clarifies coverage for telemedicine services in Kansas.
The use of telemedicine to deliver health care services is growing in Kansas. A recent survey of
Kansas hospitals found that over 70 are actively engaged in some kind of telemedicine activity.
KHA believes every Kansan deserves access to quality health care. Telemedicine is one way to
ensure that our rural communities have the same access to health services as urban areas. The rural
nature of our state coupled with the anticipated health care workforce shortages in future years
makes encouraging telemedicine programs in Kansas imperative.
Telemedicine brings many benefits to Kansas. Below are just a few that we would like to highlight.
Economic Development and Quality of Life
• Keeps dollars in local economy
• Aids in business recruitment and retention
• Workforce development/jobs
Patient Perspective
• Access to care when needed
• Saves time, travel and other expenses
• Better integration of services
Provider Perspective
• Front-line support in the emergency room
• Accuracy of diagnosis and reduction of medical errors
• Increased efficiency

Kansas Hospital Association

215 SE 8th Ave.  PO Box 2308  Topeka, KS 66601-2308  (785) 233-7436  FAX: (785) 233-6955  www.kha-net.org

Employers Perspective
• Less “lost work” time
• Preventative treatment helps avoid costlier services later
• Employee satisfaction
We are supportive of any efforts which remove barriers to telemedicine activities. This bill assures
that those companies who currently provide coverage for telemedicine will make it easy for both
patients and providers to navigate. It is a great step forward in helping to promote more use of
telemedicine.
Thank you for consideration of our comments. Feel free to contact us if you have any questions or
need additional information.

