Testimony
Kansas House Health and Human Services Committee
Presented by Yi Liao
On behalf of
Genoa, a QoL Healthcare Company
February 16, 2017
Chairman Hawkins, Members of the House Health and Human Services Committee. My name is Yi Liao
and on behalf of Genoa, a QoL Healthcare Company (Genoa), thank you for the opportunity to testify in
support of House Bill 2206, the Kansas Telehealth Legislation.
Genoa Telepsychiatry is the nation’s leading provider of telepsychiatry services to the mental health and
addictions treatment community. We understand the unique and special needs of individuals with severe
and persistent mental illness (SPMI). Our Telepsychiatry division employs 180 physicians nationally and
6 in Kansas. Currently, we offer services inside 2 Community Mental Health Centers (CMHCs), and one
Federally Qualified Health Center in the state.
Furthermore, Genoa also operates approximately 350 pharmacies nationally and 12 in Kansas. These are
full service pharmacies located inside CMHCs that offer confidential, discreet, and convenient ways to fill
prescriptions.
Genoa is dedicated to serving people with mental illness and addictions, who unfortunately struggle to
live independently in our communities. By improving access to psychiatric services, we can help ensure
that our patients live as healthy and productive members of society. House Bill 2206 will help
accomplish this goal by creating parity between medicine and telemedicine.
We believe that mental health is underserved in rural Kansas. The majority of psychiatrists are located in
Wichita, Lawrence, Topeka, and Kansas City. In the 44 states where we operate, Telepsychiatry has
proven effective in bridging this gap and providing much needed, convenient psychiatric services to this
population. Kansas Medicaid and Medicare already see the need for telehealth service and offer telehealth
as a benefit. We believe Kansas residents should not be treated differently for simply using a telemedicine
service.
Mister Chairman, Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to testify on this highly
important issue. I am happy to answer any questions you may have.
Sincerely, Yi Liao
Genoa Telepsychiatry • Product Manager
33 W. 17th St., Floor 5 • New York, NY 10011
917-868-9697
yliao@genoa-qol.com

7577 Central Parke Blvd., Suite 124 • Mason, Ohio 45040 • Phone: (513) 804-8618 • Fax: (513) 445-4482

