Statement of Michael Atwood, MD, CHIE
Vice President and Chief Medical Officer
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas, Inc.
House Health and Human Services Committee
February 16, 2017

Good Afternoon Chairman Hawkins and Members:
I am Mike Atwood, Chief Medical Officer, for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas. I
practiced Family Medicine in Topeka for more than 20 years and understand the value that
advancing telemedicine services in Kansas potentially offers to all Kansans. Blue Cross and Blue
Shield of Kansas (BCBSKS) has a long history of supporting telemedicine services for our
members. Providing access to specialty care in the State where such care would otherwise be
unavailable was the prime reason BCBSKS was the pioneer in Kansas in providing coverage for
telehealth services for specialty consults when these sevices are not available in the local
community. Subsequently, we added coverage for the originating site fee to help defray the
costs of the facility where telehealth services originate. Over the last 20+ years we have paid
hundreds of thousands of dollars in reimbursement for telehealth services.
Telemedicine is an excellent tool when it is offered to compliment existing medical services in
rural communities or bring select specialty services into underserved areas. Some services are
more adaptable to the capabilities offered via telemedicine than others. Psychiatry services,
particularly after a physician patient relationship has been established in person, may be
continued via telemedicine with excellent results for some patients. Evaluation of abdominal
pain is an example of a condition that would not generally be appropriate for evaluation and
management via telemedicine. I have concerns with regard to the parity aspects of HB 2206. I
believe that the provision calling for reimbursement parity will create a situation that will not
serve to advance telemedicine in Kansas in the long term and it will create expectations that will
not benefit our members, our providers or health plans. Parity in this regard will also result in
increased costs to health insurance products at a time when the citizens of the State of Kansas are
already feeling the pinch of significant health insurance cost inflation.
Telemedicine capabilities are expanding rapidly due to advances in technology, but they still
have not replaced the need for hands on examination in many circumstances. Continued
expansion that recognizes the business need to reimburse in a manner that matches the clinical
situation without the one size fits all impact of a mandate would benefit all parties. Insurers are

challenged by both employers and the individuals who buy our coverage to offer high quality
products with lower deductibles and premiums. It is extremely rare that state or federal laws and
regulations dictate how insurers or any industry for that matter, structure their payment levels to
their suppliers. The overall cost impact is likely to be deleterious and the benefit is unproven.
On behalf of BCBSKS and our hundreds of thousands of members – Kansans who trust us for
their health insurance needs, I ask the Committee to reconsider HB 2206 in favor of a less
prescriptive and more market dictated approach to expanding access to telemedicine in Kansas.

Page 2

Page 3

