HOUSE HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES COMMITTEE
February, 16 2017
Testimony Opposing House Bill 2206
Melissa Panettiere
Director of Governmental Affairs
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee, my name is Melissa Panettiere and I am
here today on behalf of Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City to testify against House Bill
2206.
Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Kansas City is a not-for-profit health plan serving residents in
the greater Kansas City area, including Johnson and Wyandotte counties in Kansas and 30
counties in Northwest Missouri. Our mission is to use our role as the area’s leading health
insurer to provide affordable access to healthcare and improve the health and wellness of our
members. The ability to provide affordable coverage is difficult given the new rules and taxes
that are imposed under the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The new payment parity requirements
imposed in House bill 2206 will further challenge our ability to provide affordable coverage as
consumers absorb the higher payment rates to telehealth providers in their premiums.
Many states are enacting laws requiring commercial health plans to cover medical services
provided via telehealth to the same extent they cover medical services provided in-person.
These laws are intended to promote innovation and care delivery in the private sector by
catalyzing healthcare providers and plans to invest in and use the powerful telehealth
technologies available in the marketplace. However, this legislation goes much further and
would mandate payment parity between telehealth providers and in-person providers.
There are important distinctions between the fixed cost components that are taken into
consideration when developing rates for in-person care versus care provided via telemedicine.
CMS has set precedent in this regard; physicians are paid more for office visits than for inpatient visits in a hospital setting primarily because the brick and mortar component exists for
the office visit. Several components exist for in-person physician care that are absent from the
telehealth model, such as: overhead, front office staff, nursing staff who spend time getting
vitals, and the physician’s physical examination. These components are not included in the
telehealth model, nor should they be.
Telehealth services are not equivalent to in-person services and therefore should not receive
parity to in-person services in reimbursements. Primary care physicians (PCPs) are paid at a
higher rate because we expect them to manage our members’ care throughout the year (i.e.
referrals to in-network specialists, encourage wellness activities, and perform yearly exams).
On the contrary, telehealth appointments might be one-time engagements, which creates

problems when the health data from that appointment might not be added to a patient’s PCP.
This could potentially create gaps in the heath records, which ultimately could have major
effects on diagnosis and treatment at later times. If telehealth services save money and are
more efficient then the reimbursement for services should mirror those savings.
While we recognize that telehealth has the potential to resolve access issues facing rural
Kansans, a mandate on all insurers, even those operating outside of the under-served areas,
will eliminate the intended savings to the system and to Kansans’ premiums. Telehealth is
supposed to be the new innovative way to deliver care and save the health system and patient
money. Mandating payment parity is going backwards to the old payment model.

I would be happy to answer any questions you may have.

