409 W. Cloud
Salina, KS 67401

Michael C. Lowers, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
Rhonda Bird, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
Phone 785-309-5100
Fax
785-309-5101

February 14, 2017

To:

Chairman Hawkins
Members of the House Health and Human Services Committee

From: Michael C. Lowers
Executive Director
Central Kansas Cooperative in Education
409 W. Cloud St.
Salina, KS 67401
(785) 309-5100
Re:

Written Testimony: HB2206

Dear Chairman Hawkins and Members of the House Health and Human Services Committee:
I have the honor of serving as the Executive Director of Special Education at the Central Kansas
Cooperative in Education in Salina, Kansas. Our goal is to level the playing field for students with
exceptional needs ages 3-21. It is a delight to work with our children as they grow and develop into
wonderful young women and men. We serve 2980 students in exceptional IEP programs across 4000
square miles in 12 school districts. Our services include: Special Education certified teachers, school
psychology, occupational therapy, physical therapy, speech (SLP), audiology/hearing impairment, vision
impairment, preschool (ages 3-5), gifted and talented students, transition to workforce programming (ages
18-21) and we provide paraeducators. We have a very dedicated staff who works very hard to meet the
needs of all students!
As you are aware, the shortage of staff members with certified licenses continues to grow each year.
Specifically, we have struggled greatly in the last few years to hire new Speech Language Pathologists as
staff have retired or as SLPs have been hired by other cooperatives and/or medical institutions due to better
pay and benefits. As a result, we are currently short 8.5 FTE (Full-time equivalency) speech language
pathologists. We, of course, try very hard to hire and retain highly skilled SLPs but it has become very
difficult to say the least. We also have tried to use contract labor companies to bring in SLPs from outside
our area to move to our community and provide speech therapy in person. These organizations have been
unable to find any SLPs to move to Salina. So, next we set up online speech therapy through a company,
Presence Learning. P.L. currently provides staffing for 8.5 SLPs serving 430 of our students in speech.
Without this service, I, frankly, would be unable to provide services to these students and we would be out
of compliance with IDEA.
In looking at neighboring states, Colorado, Oklahoma and Missouri, teletherapy is being used in these
locations as well---with one difference. When we use teletherapy in Kansas, cooperatives and school
districts cannot claim Medicaid funding for students receiving online therapy. In the neighboring states
mentioned, the organizations can claim Medicaid….I write this testimony to ask that Kansans be offered
the same opportunity to claim Medicaid for online therapy as well. Our organization is losing
approximately $240,000 per year because of this difference.

Some points to consider:










On-line speech therapists are licensed in Kansas just like all SLPs delivering service in person.
The quality of SLPs provided by Presence Learning has been outstanding.
On-line speech therapists can live anywhere but the bulk of ours live in the metro Kansas City area.
As with many situations in Kansas, the population and thus the availability of SLPs is in the more
urban areas. Online therapy allows rural areas to access staff who live in the urban areas of
Kansas.
Our SLP department fully supports our ability to collect Medicaid for therapy provided online.
They have seen firsthand the high quality of speech therapy service provided online and they state
that they are very impressed with how online therapy and the use of innovative technology provides
speech services for the students.
Technology and the use of innovative techniques, including teletherapy, is the wave of the future.
Kids really like to use technology and it is amazing how much using online therapy can change the
view of some of our students…..it is novel and different…..the use of technology lights up their
faces!
For our cooperative, we have a speech para in the room at all times….hence the child can develop
an “in person” relationship with the paraeducator. Having an adult in the room also means that the
speech therapy room is safe, organized and always supervised. In addition to this one-on-one
relationship, the online speech therapist is present via video and we have found that, since our
students have been born into and they function comfortably in a technology rich society, they feel
very comfortable as well receiving therapy via technology. As a result, they get great therapy and
they also develop strong relationships with the online therapists. I believe that this is innate in our
children. As adults, we tend to be more cautious about the use of technology. The fact of the
matter is that the kids thrive on teletherapy.

Mr. Chairman and members of the committee, for the reasons listed above, I respectfully advocate that all
speech therapists and the therapy they provide be allowed to apply for Medicaid reimbursement, whether in
person or when online therapy is provided to students. Either delivery mode works very well and the
therapists in both settings are fully licensed to provide speech therapy by the state of Kansas. Again, we
are losing $240,000 per year due to this situation. You voice now can change that as you discuss this
situation.
If I can answer any additional questions, please let me know. I can be reached at (785) 309-5100 or at
mike.lowers@usd305.com.

Sincerely,
Michael C. Lowers
Executive Director
Central Kansas Cooperative in Education
409 W. Cloud St.
Salina, KS 67401

