Testimony (written only) presented by Debra L. Burnett, Ph.D., CCC-SLP, President of the Kansas SpeechLanguage-Hearing Association to the House Health and Human Services Committee re: HB 2206
February 14, 2017
Dear Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee,
The Kansas Speech-Language-Hearing Association, KSHA, supports the passage of HB 2206.
I represent KSHA as its President and a practicing speech-language pathologist employed at Kansas State
University in Manhattan, KS. KSHA is a professional membership organization made up of about 1000
speech-language pathologists and audiologists. We appreciate this opportunity to offer our support to
HB 2206. Speech-language pathology services provided by our members in the schools are affected by
shortages of qualified, licensed professionals. As a result, and with the advancement of technology for
telepractice, schools have implemented alternative methods of service delivery. These innovative
services are effective but unfortunately have been impeded by the lack of reimbursement for Medicaideligible students.
Rationale for Support of HB 2206
HB 2206 would support best practices in service delivery to children in the state of Kansas as follows:
1) Quality Student Services. There is no question that the service delivery methods of telepractice
within school settings are equal to in-person services. This model has been employed for a
variety of professions and diagnostic groups. Service delivery for students receiving special
education services Kansas, i.e., those who receive services via IDEA or about 13% of all enrolled
students, is jeopardized when shortages and reimbursement limitations create a barrier.
Services are best supported when qualified professionals can use a variety of methods at their
disposal. When school districts do not have the financial resources to provide services in the
absence of available in-person speech-language pathologists, those children may go without
services.
2) Positive Student Learning Outcomes for Telepractice Service Delivery. Recently published
outcomes from the use of Medicaid-reimbursed telepractice showed considerable support and
favorable results (Short, Houston, Scott, & Forducey, 2016). From a sample of 578 children
enrolled in PreK through grade 12 in Oklahoma, the progress demonstrated by those students
receiving services via telepractice was equal to or greater than findings from the National
Outcomes Measurement System’s data for traditional service delivery methods. These services,
when reimbursed via Medicaid, are a viable option when in-person services are not feasible.

Briefly, I would like to point out that passing this bill does NOT…
a. Compromise service delivery to students or threaten compliance with IDEA, ESSA, or the
framework of MTSS.
b. Increase the cost of services for Medicaid reimbursement– in fact, cost will be comparable
to in-person service delivery.
c. Reduce the qualification of service providers. As stated in the bill, licensure and certification
requirements will continue to be in place as they are for in-person service delivery.
In summary, it is in the best interest of children receiving special education services to utilize
evidence-based approaches, which includes telepractice, and for schools to receive Medicaid funding
for those services. I am happy to address any questions Committee members may have. Thank you for
the opportunity to present testimony.
References cited:
Short, L., Rea, T., Houston, B., Scott, S., & Forducey, P. (2016). Positive outcomes for speech telepractice
as evidence for reimbursement policy change. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups,
Vol. 1 (SIG 18), 3-11.
Sincerely,

Debra Burnett, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
President of KSHA

THROUGH EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION, ALL INDIVIDUALS WILL REALIZE THEIR POTENTIAL.

148 S. Bay Country Ct.
Wichita, KS 67235

PHONE
FAX
EMAIL
WEBSITE

316.208.2288
316.202.2299
ksha@ksha.org
www.ksha.org

