Testimony – HB 2206
House Health and Human Services Committee – February 16, 2017
Jason Wesco, Executive Vice-President
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for allowing me to provide testimony in support
of HB 2064.
Background
My organization provides access to primary medical, dental, behavioral health and related services to all
individuals regardless of ability to pay with the goal of improving the overall health of the communities
we serve. Last year we cared for more than 43,000 patients during nearly 160,000 visits to clinics
located in Baxter Springs, Coffeyville, Columbus, Independence, Iola, Parsons and Pittsburg.
Our patients are overwhelmingly of modest means. Over 96% of our patients are considered lowincome with earnings below 200% of the Federal Poverty Level (about $40,000 for a family of three or
less). Directly related to income is insurance status: more than 15,000 of our patients are uninsured.
Inseparable from socioeconomic and insurance status is overall health. According to the annual County
Health Rankings report, the nine counties of southeast Kansas have an average Health Factors* ranking
of 93 of 101 counties ranked. Our healthiest county ranked 77, our unhealthiest 100.
And because many of our patients have lacked access to care – some for much of their lives – they often
come to us with multiple and severe health conditions that should be managed in consultation with one or
more specialists. Specialists that due to lack of resources or geographic barriers are not available to many
of our patients.
Access to Specialty Care
At CHC/SEK, and in CHC’s across Kansas, primary care providers often serve as a stand-in
specialist — researching, consulting specialists who will talk with them and doing as much as possible —
for critically ill and uninsured patients who cannot afford to see one.

“It’s very hard to know that because of a lack of resources, someone will
die.– CHC/SEK Physician
Tele-specialty Care
Given these challenges, CHC/SEK has made a strategic commitment to expanding access to specialty
care a top priority in 2017. The primary way we intend to achieve this goal is through a partnership
with Vigilias – a Wichita-based multi-specialty telehealth based practice. This partnership will allow us
to bring multiple specialists to our patients first through our clinic in Pittsburg and then throughout our
system. Not only will this partnership bring direct care to our patients, Vigilias has also agreed to make
their providers available to provide continuing education to our primary care providers to improve their
skills and make them better able to manage patients facing multiple and complex health conditions.
The future of access to care in rural Kansas looks none too bright if we do not take immediate action.

P.O. Box 1832, 3011 N. Michigan, Pittsburg, KS 66762-1832

Phone: 620.231.9873

Fax: 620.231.5062

A weakening healthcare infrastructure, pervasive workforce shortages, socioeconomic challenges,
poor health outcomes and a declining population base create looming crisis not only in access to
care but in the viability of rural communities. While we know that expanded access to tele-health
services for all individuals of all payor types is not a magic bullet, we do believe that expanded access to
innovative models of care will lead to further innovations that will benefit all individuals.
And, in terms of access to specialty care, in many rural Kansas communities everyone – rich or
poor, insured or not – are underserved. Requiring payors to fully compensate providers and sites for
services is critical to helping ensure that some of our sickest fellow Kansans will have the opportunity to
access much needed care in their home communities or in a community within a reasonable distance.
On behalf of the board, staff and most especially the patients of the Community Health Center of
Southeast Kansas, I ask for your support of this important piece of legislation.
Thank you for considering my testimony. Best wishes as you deliberate on this matter.

P.O. Box 1832, 3011 N. Michigan, Pittsburg, KS 66762-1832

Phone: 620.231.9873

Fax: 620.231.5062

