Testimony on House Bill 2206
House Committee on Health and Human Services
Secretary Susan Mosier, MD, MBA, FACS
Kansas Department of Health and Environment
February 16, 2017

House Bill 2206 provides an important framework upon which we can expand telemedicine utilization in the state of Kansas.
The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) describes telemedicine as the “the use of electronic
communication and information technologies to provide or support clinical care at a distance.” Practically speaking,
telemedicine allows physicians to evaluate patients and provide care from remote locations. This technology enables an
internal medicine doctor to oversee the hospitalization of a patient over 200 miles away, an ophthalmologist to review a
retinal scan on someone they have never met in person or a psychiatrist to manage a person’s behavioral health needs
without requiring the patient to spend a day traveling. The technology needed to provide exceptional care exists and is
being used across the nation. This bill provides the infrastructure needed to support telemedicine growth and sustainability
in Kansas.
92 Kansas counties are designated as primary care health professional shortage areas and 100 Kansas counties are designated
as behavioral health professional shortage areas. Recruiting and retaining health professionals in Kansas is challenging and
the competition for providers among states is fierce. Access to health professionals is a national problem that is getting
worse. The Association of American Medical Colleges projects our national physician shortfall to be between 61,700 and
94,700 physicians by 2025. In short, the demand for health professionals will continue to increase in the coming years. The
resulting competitive environment for health professionals demands a multi-faceted solution. We must not only consider
how do we increase the number of health professionals in the state of Kansas; but also, how do we leverage the latest
technology to expand the impact of the professionals we have?
According to the American Telemedicine Association, 15 million people were helped by telemedicine in 2015. This
represents a 50% increase in 2 years. Additionally, 42 states introduced more than 200 telemedicine laws in 2015. This
field of medicine is rapidly expanding for numerous reasons- access to care, patient demand, availability of technology to
name a few. Last fall, U.S. News & World Report wrote an article on Virtual Care Clinics. The article highlighted Mercy
Virtual Care Center where care is provided to patients in their homes to treat conditions like chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease. The Virtual Care Center also provides support to 38 different hospitals in seven states. A couple of examples of
their hospital services include specialists observing patients and directing care at distant ICUs or providing guidance on
stroke treatment to community hospitals. The health system’s president reported mortality rate in their ICU program was
trending 40 percent lower than predicted and saved $40 million dollars. Although there are many ways to utilize
telemedicine, the common thread to all these initiatives is patients have the ability to stay in their communities to receive
needed health care. The right care, in the right place, and at the right time.

References & Notes
 Kansas currently has 92 out of 105 counties that are designated as Health Professional Shortage Areas.


“Physician demand continues to grow faster than supply leading to a projected shortfall of between 61,700 and
94,700 physicians by 2025.”
(https://www.aamc.org/download/458082/data/2016_complexities_of_supply_and_demand_projections.pdf)



In 2015, 15M people helped by telemedicine (up 50% from 2 years previous). 165,000 mHealth Apps from
45,000 vendors, 32% of consumers had at least one health app on their phone, More than 200 telemedicine laws
introduced in 42 states, In 2016, estimated 1.25M people will use online Direct to Consumer
https://www.aamc.org/download/458082/data/2016_complexities_of_supply_and_demand_projections.pdf



Virtual Care Clinic in Chesterfield, MO: http://www.usnews.com/news/articles/2016-08-17/are-virtual-careclinics-the-wave-of-the-future

