!
Testimony for House Bill 2217--Emergency Opioid Antagonists
House Health and Human Services Committee
By Jody K. Reel, PharmD
February 7th, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
My name is Dr. Jody Reel, and I am a Kansas pharmacy owner and Chair of Government Affairs /Board
Director for the Kansas Pharmacists Association. The Kansas Pharmacists Association is the statewide
professional association in Kansas that represents Kansas pharmacists from all practice settings. Thank you for
allowing me to testify on behalf of KPhA in support of House Bill 2217--Emergency Opioid Antagonists.
Passage of this bill would increase access to the lifesaving drug naloxone.
The Centers for Disease Control has declared that the United States is having an opioid overdose epidemic.
Nearly half of all opioid overdose deaths involve a prescription opioid, including the common medications
morphine, hydrocodone, oxycodone, and fentanyl. In 2015, 329 people died from an opioid overdose in the
State of Kansas, and the number of deaths is increasing every year. Stronger opioids are available for abuse,
which pose a risk to those coming in contact with them accidentally, such as our state’s first responders in the
execution of their duties. Opioid antagonists such as naloxone can delay the effects of an opioid overdose until
an individual can get to emergency medical care and can be effectively administered by medical professionals,
first responders, and the general public with appropriate training.
House Bill 2217 has three parts:
1. Increased access to opioid antidotes for patients and caregivers by allowing pharmacists to dispense them
based on a protocol.
2. Allowing first responders, law enforcement, and lab workers to carry and administer opioid antidotes during
the course of their profession. HB 2217 ensures proper training, record keeping, and communication to ensure
proper patient care.
3. Good Samaritan language for all dispensing and administrations of opioid antidotes. Forty-seven states have
statutes similar to HB 2217.
Thank you for your consideration on House Bill 2217--Emergency Opioid Antagonists Bill. Passage of this bill
will certainly aid in combating the opioid epidemic, and improve the safety of Kansas citizens, law
enforcement, and first responders.

!
Jody K. Reel, PharmD
Kansas Pharmacists Association

