800 SW Jackson St., Suite 1414
Topeka, KS 66612
Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary

Board of Pharmacy

phone: 785-296-4056
fax: 785-296-8420
pharmacy@ks.gov
www.kansas.gov/pharmacy
Sam Brownback, Governor

Testimony concerning HB 2217
House Committee on Health and Human Services
February 7, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy respectfully submits this testimony in support of HB 2217. The
bill would allow increased access to Naloxone and any future emergency opioid antagonists, similar to
what has been done in more than 35 states. In 2014, the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy, of
which Kansas is a member, issued a policy statement in support of increasing access due to the rising
number of overdose deaths in the United States. In addition, the National Safety Council recently
published a paper identifying four key actions states could take that would have an immediate and
sustained impact on the opioid epidemic, one of which is increasing access to Naloxone.
The Board is ready and willing to take on any necessary oversight and administration of this program,
including developing and implementing a statewide protocol. The Board has a good working
relationship with involved stakeholders and regulatory agencies to assist with proper education,
resources, and adoption of rules and regulations concerning this Act. The Board does not anticipate any
fiscal impact that cannot be absorbed by our current appropriation authority and staff, but it is difficult to
estimate unknowns or predict unforeseen circumstance that may arise during program implementation.
While it may be argued that opioid antagonists have no potential for abuse, it is more accurate to state
that Naloxone has no potential for addiction or dependency. That is why it is not scheduled in the
Controlled Substances Act. Some groups have noted that Naloxone has a street value, and that there is
potential for individuals to plan to overdose and later administer the antagonist. Thus, education,
protections, and record-keeping are important for public safety and continued access to these important
medications.
Respectfully submitted,
Alexandra Blasi, JD, MBA
Executive Secretary

