New England Building

Phone : (785) 296-4986

503 South Kansas Avenue
Topeka, KS 66603-3404

Fax (785) 296-0256
http://www.kdads.ks.gov

Timothy Keck, Secretary
Sam Brownback, Governor

HB 2195 would transfer the duties and functions of the Kansas Board of Examiners in Fitting
and Dispensing of Hearing Instruments (KBHAE) to KDADS. The Kansas Department for Aging
and Disability Services (KDADS), Health Occupations Credentialing department is responsible for
the administration of licensing, certification or credentialing of eight different professions and
occupations. Health Occupations Credentialing already has long-standing relationships with
two boards – the Board of Adult Care Home Administrators and the Kansas Speech-Language
Pathology and Audiology Board. The Kansas Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Board
is advisory to KDADS.
While the transfer makes sense from a practical standpoint, the committee should not assume
that the transfer would result in initial substantial savings. There would be initial costs related
to the transference of licensee data from the current database location as well as adding
another profession and associated licensure process to our database and license renewal
website. Online license renewal is available to the professions licensed and registered by
KDADS along with a searchable website that allows the public to look up licensure status
information.
We would recommend the following changes;
•

•
•

•

The Board is currently fee funded with 10 percent of the monies received going to the
State General Fund. We would recommend that that language be restored to the
current bill to allow KDADS to receive those funds to offset the costs.
Remove the language requiring fees be reduced whenever the amount of fees collected
is in excess of expenses.
Remove the requirement that an Audiologist must also be licensed as a Hearing
Instrument Specialist (HIS) in order to fit and dispense hearing aids. Removal of the HIS
license for audiologists would not reduce the protection of Kansas consumers because
the educational programs required for audiology include all aspects of the dispensing
and fitting of hearing instruments.
Change licensure period from a one-year period to two years to align the licensure
period with all other professions licensed by KDADS.

Regulatory issues do arise where the regulations for Audiologists and Hearing Instrument
Specialists overlap and require involvement of both the Kansas Board of Examiners in Fitting
and Dispensing of Hearing Instruments and the Kansas Speech-Language Pathology and
Audiology Board. Attached are some examples of those issues.

Steve Irwin
Director Health Occupations Credentialing

