Ms. Brodie Cullumber
5 SW Fairview Drive
Ottawa, Kansas 66067

February 13, 2017
Testimony in Support of HB 2219
Before the Kansas House Health and Human Services Committee
Hon. Chairman Hawkins, Vice Chair Concannon, Ranking Member Wilson and Members of the
Committee:
My name is Brodie Cullumber and I am a type 1 diabetic. Unlike type 2 diabetes where the body is
resistant to insulin, my body no longer produces insulin. I was diagnosed four years ago after a trip to
the hospital to treat what my doctor thought was mono. While there I had blood drawn and it was
discovered that my blood sugar was nearly 600. The normal range is 70-140. I was taken by ambulance
to Children’s Mercy Hospital where I spent two days in the ICU and four days in the hospital.
When I was discharged, my life was different. I had a blood glucose meter that I would use at least
four times a day. For the first several months after my diagnosis I took shots of insulin each day, and
I hated needles. Now I have a wearable insulin pump that is attached to me nearly every hour of the
day. Every meal requires computation of carbs, calculating my dose of insulin and testing myself to
make sure my blood sugar levels stay in range. While I can’t always eat, drink, or do what my friends
are doing I work hard to make sure that being diabetic doesn’t define who I am.
Yet I am one of the lucky ones. Other kids that I have been in classes or at camp with received their
diagnosis many years before me, some as young as 5. Some have celiac disease and are very allergic to
gluten. Still others have thyroid or kidney problems in addition to their diabetes. We will all share a
lifetime of increased risks for other health problems; financial burdens for testing supplies, insulin,
and increased medical checkups; and worst for people my age, being treated differently than everybody
else.
HB 2219 won’t cure my diabetes or change the path for many of my friends who have type 1. But
what it can do is increase awareness about diabetes, help put information in one place, and most
importantly require action plans so policy makers like you can know what next steps to take to keep
up the fight against diabetes. My hope is to be part of the effort to eventually make sure no other
young people have to face type 1 diabetes. HB 2219 is a step in that direction and I ask you to support
it and pass it favorably. Thank you.

