TELADOC TESTIMONY FOR KANSAS HB 2254
February 13, 2017
Claudia Duck Tucker |Vice President of Government Relations |Teladoc
Mr. Chairman and members of the House Health and Human Services Committee:
Thank you for your time today. I am Claudia Tucker, Vice President of Government Affairs for
Teladoc. Teladoc is the nation’s oldest and largest telemedicine company. We have well over
17 million members and more than 1000 physicians, all of whom are board-certified and who
possess, on average, 20 years of experience in the practice of medicine. Teladoc operates in 49
states. The only state that we do not do business in is Arkansas, and that will probably change
this year.
There are four major companies in the primary care telemedicine market. Of all the
telemedicine visits done in the U.S. in 2016, Teladoc completed 60% of them, making us the
largest telemedicine company by far. We have delivered over 2 million remote visits in the
United States. This milestone was hit without a single malpractice claim. Telemedicine is
booming because, while not a silver bullet, it’s the sharpest tool in the tool bag of employers,
health plans, state employee systems and others to reduce costs and improve access. A
Teladoc visit with a Board certified Kansas physician is just $45. That’s a third of the cost of an
urgent care facility and 2.3% of the cost of going to an ER for a simple non-emergent illness.
Teladoc works with legislators and regulators in all 50 states to help them understand the
technology, what is possible in telemedicine, what makes good public policy and what are
potential unintended consequences of new policy proposals. I want to tell you a little bit about
who we are and how we do what we do because I think that background is important as we
discuss HB 2254.
Teladoc operates in the primary care space. By that, I mean simple non-emergent illnesses like
sinusitis, bronchitis, the flu and urinary tract infections. We are NOT treating cancer, setting a
broken leg, or assisting with dialyses. In addition to the primary care space, we have recently
launched our behavioral health, dermatology and smoking cessation platforms. For this
conversation, let’s talk about the primary care.
Good public policy for telemedicine will involve three things:
•
•
•

the recognition that a physician-patient relationship can be established using telemedicine (this
was included in the Federation of State Medical Boards model policy in 2014);
that the standard of care be the same for telemedicine as it is for traditional medicine and
that the systems used must be technology neutral

As relevant to Kansas, these guiding principles mean that a Kansas licensed physician, when
meeting the standard of care, can prescribe appropriate medications, excluding controlled
Teladoc 2 Manhattanville Road, Suite 203 + Purchase, NY 10577
P (203) 742-1719 F (203) 769-1544 + www.teladoc.com

substances. Teladoc is NOT direct to consumer and is a sponsored benefit thru employers,
health plans, associations, unions and other. We know that technology and healthcare
innovation moves much faster than the legislative and regulatory process. We don’t know what
technology will be available next year, much less 5 years from now. As long as the standard of
care for the physician is the same – we certainly don’t want telemedicine to be of lesser quality
nor do we want the standard to be higher and which will install artificial barriers where they are
not needed – we have built the foundation for a safe and quality-driven telemedicine
environment.
As I said, our doctors are licensed and board certified in the state where the patient is located.
They are ER docs, family docs, internists and pediatricians. Please know that OUR docs are
YOUR docs. We have a waiting list in every state of docs who want to join our network,
because it allows them to work when and where they want, eliminates all the overhead and
paperwork, and Teladoc covers their insurance.
Teladoc covers 187K lives in Kansas. We have saved Kansans and the Kansas healthcare system
$4.6 million in 2016, and that number will grow in 2017. The Cities of Wichita, Hutchinson,
Ottawa and Augusta are Teladoc clients, as are Garden City Public Schools, Fort Scott and
Wichita Public Schools. Other clients include Nueterra Healthcare, Kansas Turnpike Association,
Riley County Police Department and nursing homes in the state.
The bill before you provides clarity about prescribing via telemedicine and clearly defines how
the physician-patient relationship is established. By deliberately defining what is required to
establish that physician-patient relationship, you have put the guardrails in place that will
ensure high-quality telemedicine services and remove the concerns regarding "pill mills" and
other illegal activities that may currently be taking place.
Again, we thank you for the opportunity to provide our comments in strong support of HB 2254
and ask that you recommend the bill favorably. I will be happy to answer any questions you
may have at the appropriate time.

Teladoc 2 Manhattanville Road, Suite 203 + Purchase, NY 10577
P (203) 742-1719 F (203) 769-1544 + www.teladoc.com

