Kansas Podiatric Medical Association

February 10, 2017

To: Chairman Daniel Hawkins and Members of the Committee
House Committee on Health and Human Services
Statehouse
300 SW 10th Ave. Suite 546-S
Topeka, Kansas 66612-1504
From: Scott D. McKenzie
Re: HB 2254

Testimony of Scott D. McKenzie

The undersigned, as Executive Secretary of the Kansas Podiatric Medical Association,
submits the following testimony in support of revision of HB2254.
HB2254 at Section 1. (a)(4) states "Physician" means a person licensed to practice medicine
and surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery in the state of Kansas. The language does not
clearly include Doctors of Podiatric Medicine (DPM) and should include the words "or podiatric
medicine and surgery" in addition existing language.
Doctors ofPodiatric Medicine (DPMs) are referred to as "podiatric physicians" in 23 states:
Arizona, Colorado, Delaware, Florida, Illinois, Indiana, Louisiana, Minnesota, Nebraska, Nevada,
New Jersey, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Washington, and Wyoming.
Doctors of Podiatric Medicine are referred to as "physician(s) who practices podiatric
medicine" in seven states: Arkansas, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, New Mexico, Ohio, and West
Virginia.
Doctors of Podiatric Medicine are referred to as "physician of foot and leg or physician of
foot and ankle" in five states: Georgia, Idaho, Missouri, Montana, and Nebraska.
Kansas doctors of podiatric medicine regularly participate in telecommunication services
related to the delivery of health care. Such a shortage of doctors of podiatric medicine exist in
Kansas that the use of medical telecommunication services are essential to effective delivery of their
specialized medical services. Without some modification of the language in HB2254, there is the
possibility that DPMs could be barred from using modem telecommunication services in the delivery
of indispensable health care.
In the United States medical and surgical care of the foot and ankle is mainly provided by two
groups, Doctors of Podiatric Medicine (DPM) and Orthopedic Surgeons (MD or DO).

]KPMA
Executive Office:
1603 SW 37 " Street
Topeka, Kansas 66611-2645
Telephone: (785) 267-5400

Podiatric medicine is a specialty within the medical profession. Doctors of Podiatric
Medicine receive education and training comparable to allopathic (MD) and osteopathic (DO)
physicians. Like a MD or DO, a DPM must complete four years of post graduate medical school.
Following medical school, DPMs are required to complete a surgical based residency.
Podiatric medicine and surgery is the specialty that addresses the diagnosis and treatment of
pathologies and conditions of the lower extremities, with special emphasis in the diagnosis and
treatment of the foot, ankle, and their governing and related structures of the leg by any and all
means.
DPMs are podiatric physicians and surgeons.
To insure that Kansas DPMs may continue to utilize telecommunication services related to
the delivery of health care it is essential they be clearly included within the meaning of "Physician."
Respectfully submitted,

Scott D. McKenzie
KPMA Executive Secretary

