Testimony Before the
House Health and Human Services Committee
Re: HB 2471
By Leslie Adrian
Director of Professional Standards
Federation of State Boards of Physical Therapy
February 5, 2018
Mister Chairman and Members of the Committee:
My name is Leslie Adrian and I am a licensed physical therapist, albeit not in the state of Kansas, a military
spouse to a deployed Army officer, and Director of Professional Standards for the Federation of State Boards
of Physical Therapy (FSBPT). The Kansas Physical Therapy Advisory Council under the Board of Healing Arts is a
member of FSBPT. I have been one of the staff members involved in the development of the Compact. I
attended the February 1, 2018 meeting of the Council to discuss the Physical Therapy Licensure Compact and
address their questions. I am here to today to testify in favor of the Physical Therapy Licensure Compact, bill
HB2471.
The PT Compact is modeled on mutual recognition. A physical therapist or physical therapist assistant must
have a license in good standing in the home state; home state is defined in the Compact rules. The home
state must be a member of the Compact. When a licensee wants to work in another member state (the
remote state) a Compact Privilege must be obtained. The Compact Privilege is the authorization to practice in
the remote state. To determine eligibility for a CP, there are a few criteria that the licensee must meet: 1)
Home state is in the compact 2) Hold a current license in home state 3) No current encumbrances against any
license (compact or non-compact) and 4) No disciplinary action for the past 2 years. If all criteria is met the
individual receives the Compact Privilege.
Per the Compact statutory language, a physical therapist or physical therapist assistant working under a
Compact Privilege must abide by the laws and rules of the remote state when practicing there. There is no
impact or change in the scope of practice of PTs and PTAs in Kansas when becoming a member of the
Compact.
The Compact administration and governance is handled by the Compact Commission. The Compact
Commission is a joint public agency made up of representatives from each member state, independent of any
professional association or the FSBPT. As a governmental entity, the Commission has one delegate from each
member jurisdiction who is a current Board member or administrator. The Compact Commission staff verifies
eligibility for a Compact Privilege per the statute and rules requirements and issues the Compact Privilege with
a unique Compact Privilege number. This ensures no additional work to issue Compact Privileges for the
licensing board staff as a consequence of joining the Compact. Although statute allows it, at this time there is
no cost for Kansas to be a member of the Compact; the Commission voted to have $0 in annual assessment
this year. Each year, during the budget planning process, it will reevaluate this decision. An annual assessment
would need to be approved by a majority of the Compact Commission.

The Compact has many benefits for Kansas:
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•

Improves access to physical therapy providers
Increases choice of physical therapy providers
Preserves state-based licensure system
Improves communication between states
• Ensures full participation in license and disciplinary data system
• Disciplinary Actions - All adverse actions and disciplinary actions will be reported regularly to
Commission and shared with member states
• Sharing of investigatory information
Requires criminal background checks
Improves continuity of care for the citizens of Kansas
Improves licensure portability for physical therapists and physical therapist assistants
Facilitates alternate delivery methods such as telehealth
• Simplifies/speeds up the current process
• Addresses portability & barriers to access
• Ensures the understanding that practice of physical therapy occurs in the state where the
patient/client is located at the time
Requires continuing competence for all that practice under the Compact
Improves portability for military spouses

With 3 major military installations in the state of Kansas, McConnell Air Force Base, Fort Leavenworth, and
Fort Riley, the benefits to the military family afforded by the Compact are of significance. Although Kansas has
taken steps to provide military spouses with expedited licensure, the Compact goes even further to assist
military families. The military spouse has a choice of the state currently residing, state of the permanent
change of station orders, or the state home of record to be the home state. The Compact helps the spouses of
soldiers relocate and begin work with minimal delay; the Compact decreases the time to gain authorization to
practice even as compared to expedited licensure laws. A Compact Privilege, the authorization to practice in a
state other than the home state, can be obtained in a matter of minutes. A military spouse could wake up in
the morning, get a call from the service member saying they are moving in three weeks, and have a Compact
Privilege in that new state by lunchtime. Kansas may become a more attractive option to call home for a
military family with a physical therapist or physical therapist assistant; the military spouse has piece of mind
that with Kansas as the home state, he/she will always be able to move to a Compact state with the service
member without barriers to practice. As a military spouse myself, I understand the challenges of moving
every 2-3 years and the delays in establishing yourself professionally and personally with each move. As a
physical therapist, I can honestly say that Compact membership could influence our choice of where to live in
the future.
We anticipate minimal additional costs to participate in the Compact. There is the time and the money for
your Delegate to attend the annual in-person Commission meeting. Kansas may see a potential loss of
revenue for people currently licensed in KS who may post-Compact get a Compact Privilege instead. However,
any loss of revenue can be offset with KS charging an appropriate fee for the CP. There will also be a potential
increase in the number of Kansas residents, who are currently not licensed in Kansas because they work
elsewhere, but would need a Kansas home state license to be eligible for a CP anywhere else.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you regarding this issue and I would be happy to answer any
questions.

