Testimony Before the
House Health and Human Services Committee
Re: HB 2471
By
Jennifer Caswell, PT, DPT
Legislative Chair
Kansas Physical Therapy Association
February 5, 2018
Mister Chairman and Members of the Committee:
My name is Jennifer Caswell and I am the Legislative Chair for the Kansas Physical Therapy Association
(KPTA). I am testifying as a proponent of HB 2471, regarding the Physical Therapy Licensure Compact. The
Compact allows physical therapists and physical therapist assistants to apply for compact privilege to practice
in any of the participating states. The American Physical Therapy Association and the Federation of State
Boards of Physical Therapy worked together to work out a system that would protect the public and makes
sense for our profession moving into the future.
In Kansas, the Compact allows for decreased wait times to get physical therapists and physical therapist
assistants into areas where providers are most needed, specifically our more rural areas. This allows for better
care for our residents and continuity of care.
Military spouses moving into Kansas can also now obtain compact privileges in order to start working much
quicker, within a matter of a few days, versus a couple of months as is currently the standard. This can help
take some of the undue burden off our military spouses to allow them to start working quicker and this in turn
helps improve access to care for our residents.
Currently, Missouri has passed legislation for the Compact, as has Colorado. This legislative session has seen
both Nebraska and Oklahoma bring forth Compact legislation, so hopefully soon all states surrounding Kansas
will have the Compact, including Kansas. You can see how any towns bordering our state lines will now have
an easier transition to get therapists and assistants from those neighboring states to have Compact Privilege
and be able to work in Kansas.
Our PT Advisory Council (PTAC) and staff from the Board of Healing Arts has been able to meet with Leslie
Adrian from the Federation of State Boards of Physical therapy, whom you also were able to listen to today.
The Advisory Council was in approval of moving forward with the Licensure Compact and we look forward to
working with the Board of Healing Arts to ensure improved portability and increased PT and PTA labor work
force in Kansas.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you regarding this issue and I would be happy to answer any
questions.

