Kansas State Board of Nursing
Landon State Office Building
900 SW Jackson St., Suite 1051
Topeka, KS 66612-1230
Carol Moreland, MSN, RN
Executive Administrator

Phone: 785-296-4929
Fax: 785-296-3929
www.ksbn.org

Kansas State Board of Nursing

Jeff Colyer, M.D., Governor

Health and Human Services Committee
February 8, 2018
Testimony in Support of House Bill 2496
Carol Moreland, MSN, R.N.
Executive Administrator
Good Afternoon Chairman Hawkins and members of the Health and Human Services Committee. My
name is Carol Moreland, Executive Administrator of the Kansas State Board of Nursing (KSBN). I am
here to provide feedback from the Board of Nursing as requested regarding HB 2496.
The mission of the Board of Nursing is to assure the citizens of Kansas safe and competent practice by
nurses and mental health technicians through licensure and regulations of Registered Nurses, Licensed
Practical Nurses, four roles of Advance Practice Registered Nurses, and Licensed Mental Health
Technicians. Kansas is not currently in the NLC. Nurses seeking licensure in any state that is part of
the NLC must meet eleven uniform licensure requirements. HB 2496 would allow Kansas to join the
NLC.
The Board of Nursing held a special Board meeting on 2/1/18 to review HB 2496 and recommend
several amendments to the bill. The feedback and recommendations from the Board include:
1. Revenue loss: The Board of Nursing is a fee funded agency. If the Board of Nursing joins the
NLC the estimated revenue loss will be $367,170.00 with the 29 states that are now part of the
NLC. The revenue loss will increase as more states join the NLC. It is estimated the recurring
revenue loss of licensees’ fees will be $534,120.00 annually. Recommendations from the Board
of Nursing include:
a. Licensure types: The amendments allow the RNs and LPNs residing in Kansas to have
the option of holding either a single state or multi-state license. There are certain
situations when a RN or LPN will not be able to obtain a multi-state license as outlined in
HB 2496. This would require a change in K.S.A. 65-1117.
b. Statutory licensure fee caps: The Board of Nursing recommends changes to the statutory
licensure fee caps as detailed in K.S.A. 65-1118. In the amendment the single state
licensure statutory caps have been raised and caps added for the multi-state licenses for
RNs and LPNs. The board through rules and regulations will keep the licensure fees as
low as possible while maintaining the financial stability of the agency.
2. Continuing nursing education (CNE): The NLC does not require CNE. 25 other states,
including Missouri, do not require continuing education for nurses as facilities are required to
keep health care staff current on competencies. By joining the NLC it will allow nurses from
other states to practice in Kansas without the requirement of CNE. The Board of Nursing
believes it is unfair to require CNE for RNS and LPNs who reside in Kansas when it is not
required for nurses from other states with a multi-state license who practice in Kansas. The
Board of Nursing recommends a change to K.S.A. 65-1117 that indicates CNE is no longer
required for RNS and LPNs licensed in Kansas when the NLC is implemented. The Board will

continue to maintain the ability to use CNE for nurses who have been found in violation of the
nurse practice act and need education to improve their practice.
3. Concern not knowing which nurses are practicing in Kansas: For public safety, the Board
recommends they know when nurses with multi-state licenses from other states are in Kansas
practicing. The Board of Nursing is requesting a change to K.S.A. 65-1117 that requires any
nurse holding a multistate license that is practicing in Kansas to register with the Board within 30
days from the initial date of practice
4. Misdemeanor offense related to the practice of nursing: HB 2496 does not include as a ground
for disciplinary action terminology that includes a nurse who has been convicted or found guilty
or has entered into an agreed disposition of a misdemeanor offense related to the practice of
nursing as determined on a case-by-case basis. The Board of Nursing recommends K.S.A. 651120 be changed to include this ground.
5. Reporting of violations: The Board recommends a change to K.S.A. 65-1127 that includes
licensees shall report to the board other licensees including multi state privileges who have
violated the nurse practice act. This will ensure reporting and immunity from liability in civil
actions for reporting.
6. Implementation costs: The Board has received verbal confirmation National Council State
Boards of Nursing will fund a grant to cover the following implementation costs: communication
costs, information technology and data integrity preparation costs ($250,500.00). There will
need to be appropriations approved for FY 2019 for the other implementation costs not covered
by the grant ($82,000.00 plus the cost of remodeling for additional staff)
7. Implementation timeline: The Board of Nursing requests the implementation date of joining the
compact be changed to 11/6/2019. This allows the Board of Nursing time to make the necessary
operational and IT changes, communicate fully to licensees, employers and the public regarding
how the NLC affects them and do any remodeling necessary to accommodate additional staff.
Training for all staff must also take place before the implementation date.
8. Agency operational and IT staff: The experienced operational and IT staff at the Board of
Nursing must stay within our agency to ensure implementation toward joining the NLC proceeds
smoothly. The Board recommends a change to K.S.A. 74-1106 that states IT and operational
staff remain employees of the Board.

The Board of Nursing remains committed to joining the NLC and looks forward to working with the
Legislature to ensure the correct implementation. The Board of Nursing supports HB 2496 with the
amendments as discussed. Thank you for your time and consideration and I will stand for any questions.

