Testimony Before the

House Health and Human Services Committee
By

Wendy Funk Schrag, LMSW, ACSW
Vice President State Government Affairs
Fresenius Medical Care
January 31, 2018
Mister Chairman and Members of the Committee:
My name is Wendy Funk Schrag and I am the Vice President for State Government
Affairs for Fresenius Medical Care. I am here today to ask your support for HB 2496, the Nurse
Licensure Compact. Fresenius Medical Care is a large dialysis organization, operating in
every state except North Dakota. In Kansas, we provide dialysis services to over 1,200
people with kidney failure at 24 outpatient dialysis facilities. These individuals are a
chronic and complex patient population with multiple conditions such as diabetes and
hypertension, the leading causes of kidney failure, as well as congestive heart failure,
cardiovascular disease, and others. They must undergo dialysis treatments at least three
times each week, and even missing one treatment can be dangerous.
Our interest in the adoption of the Nurse Licensure Compact relates to two important
matters: (1) seamless staffing of dialysis facilities during times of natural disasters and
(2) use of specialized Registered Nurses to deliver supportive nursing services to our
patients through telephonic case management services.
(1) Severe weather, power outages, water contamination, or other disaster-related
events may impair our ability to provide dialysis staff at a moment’s notice when
disasters occur. Our company is nationally known for providing excellent and
timely disaster response, most recently in Texas and Puerto Rico due to the
hurricanes and in California due to wildfires. Since dialysis is a complicated
procedure that requires specialized nursing training, and with a small window of
time in which to get the patients dialyzed, dialysis nurse staffing is critical. It is
important that dialysis nurses from states that are part of the Nurse Licensure
Compact can come to the aid of patients. Sometimes our staff are also impacted

by natural disasters and need to be allowed to stay home and care for their own
needs. Having RNs who can quickly come from other states to fill in would be
possible if Kansas joins the Nurse Licensure Compact. In addition, if Kansas
nurses have multi-state licenses, they are also able to travel to assist in storm
impacted areas.
(2) The ability to provide specialized nursing care to patients remotely via telephone is
critical to improving p a t i e n t outcomes. Fresenius Medical Care currently employs
over 200 RN Case Managers located in call centers throughout the United States.
Some of the supports we provide include patient education, review of medications,
and arrangements for transportation to dialysis to reduce emergency department
visits and missed dialysis treatments. The administrative burden of obtaining
multiple nursing licenses in non-Compact states has restricted our case
management services to the states that are currently members of the Nurse
Licensure Compact. Therefore, our dialysis patients in Kansas currently do not
receive this important service.
For these reasons, we hope you will support the Nurse Licensure Compact. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you about this issue, and I would be happy to answer any questions.

Wendy Funk Schrag, LMSW, ACSW
Fresenius Medical Care
625 Medical Center Drive
Newton, KS 67114
316.841.5245
Wendy.schrag@fmc-na.com

