7570 W 21st ST N

Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104

Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President

Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

President-Elect

John Feehan, MD, Olathe

Vice President

Jeremy Presley, MD,
Dodge City

Secretary

Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Treasurer

Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres./Board Chair

Diane Steere, MD, Wichita

AAFP Delegates

Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA,
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates

Doug Gruenbacher, MD,
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors

Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP,
Lawrence
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD,
Smith Center
Holly Allen Terrell, MD, Wichita
Danelle Perry, MD, Olathe
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP,
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD,
Kansas City

Foundation President

Testimony: HB 2031 – Establishing the Advisory Council on
Palliative Care and Quality of Life
House Health and Human Services Committee
February 7, 2017
By: Carolyn Gaughan, CAE, on behalf of KAFP
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to write supporting HB 2031, on behalf of the
Kansas Academy of Family Physicians (KAFP). Our organization represents over 1,660
active, resident, student and life members across the state. The mission of KAFP is to
promote access to, and excellence in, health care for all Kansans through education and
advocacy for family physicians and their patients. Quality health care and health outcomes
for our patients guide our public policy work. Family physicians care for people of all ages,
both men and women, and work with almost every type of ailment and illness that afflict
their patients.
Family physicians want to provide patient and family-centered care that optimizes
quality of life by anticipating, preventing and treating suffering. Palliative care is known to
improve the quality of life for patients and their families and also improve health
outcomes while reducing costs. At the same time, palliative care is a major concern for
some family physicians in Kansas from a mistaken idea that it is solely involved with endof-life care, or issues related to prescribing medications to relieve pain. We are working to
combat misperceptions among some providers by holding a workshop at our upcoming
Continuing Medical Education (CME) conference in June. We are offering a workshop
titled “How to Have Conversations about Serious Illness.” It will incorporate excellent
information on palliative care for our members who participate.
Establishment of the state palliative care consumer and professional information
and education program could be especially helpful for our members through
dissemination of accurate and comprehensive information about the topic in general, and
about CME opportunities on this important topic.
For all these reasons we support HB 2031. Please let me know if you have
questions or need further information from KAFP.
Sincerely,

Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP,
Plainville

Executive Vice President

Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

Carolyn Gaughan, CAE
Executive Vice President

