KANSAS HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Committee on Health and Human Services
Testimony of Robert Eye on behalf of Trust Women, Inc. in Opposition to Section 6 of
HB 2512
February 1, 2018
Thank you Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee,
I am a lawyer here on behalf of my clients Trust Women, Inc. and Trust Women Clinics Inc. The mission of Trust
Women Inc. is to provide abortion care to women in underserved communities so that all women can make
their own decisions about their health needs. Trust Women Wichita, Inc. in Wichita provides reproductive
health care including medical and surgical abortions.
Trust Women Inc. and Trust Women Clinics Inc. are strong supporters of telemedicine. Getting health care
services to people in underserved areas is part of the mission of Trust Women, Inc. In fact, before Trust Women
established Trust Women Wichita, Wichita was the largest metropolitan area in the country without an abortion
provider. Trust Women. Inc. and its affiliated clinics are not only supportive of getting medical services to those
in need, they work to actually make it happen. Hence, my testimony today should not be considered as an
opposition to telemedicine. My testimony is directed at the exclusionary provision of Section 6 that prohibits
medical abortions via telemedicine.
Medical abortions via telemedicine are safe and authorized in states such as Iowa and Maine. The Iowa
Supreme Court unanimously upheld the right to medical abortions via telemedicine.1
Additionally, there is a compelling legal case to justify medical abortions via telemedicine. In Whole Woman's
Health v. Hellerstedt, 136 S. Ct. 2292 (2016) the U. S. Supreme Court overturned Texas legislation that had the
effect of unduly restricting access to abortion care. The statutory restrictions were determined by the Supreme
Court to lack a medical basis that could be said to protect the health of women. In rendering this opinion, the
Court provided guidance for legislation related to abortion care. The Court made clear that restrictions that
cause substantial obstacles to abortion without a corresponding health benefit for women are unconstitutional.
Telemedicine is premised on the reality that there are rural areas of our state that are medically underserved.
Denying medical abortion services and provision of abortifacients via telemedicine contradicts the goal of
expanding the scope of medical services in underserved areas.
The decision in Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt prohibits these restrictions without a showing that such
causes a health benefit to inure to women. There is no health benefit for women in underserved areas who
can’t access medical abortion services or abortifacients via telemedicine. None. Women in many underserved
areas are now required to drive hours for a medical abortion when it could be performed safely via
telemedicine closer to their homes. While their urban counterparts can access medical abortions close to home
with minimal disruption to their personal and professional lives, women in underserved areas are required to
take time away
1

http://abcnews.go.com/Health/iowa-study-shows-telemedicine-abortion-safe-women-access/story?id=14166312
http://iowapublicradio.org/post/maine-follows-iowas-lead-telemed-abortion

Trust Women Foundation
Post Office Box 3222 | Wichita, Kansas 67201 | 316.425.3215 | www.itrustwomen.org

from their jobs, families and community activities to get the same service. This penalizes women who live in
rural areas that are remote from abortion providers.
The exclusionary provision of Sec. 6 of HB 2512 is an impermissible restriction on access to medical abortion
services. Unless this restriction can be justified by a showing that such causes a health benefit for women it is
prohibited by Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt.
It is noteworthy that HB 2512 does not make any attempt to justify the Sec. 6 restriction on health grounds. The
restriction is a manifestation of the bill sponsors’ opposition to abortion care. This is an inadequate basis to
restrict medical abortions or provision abortifacients of via telemedicine under prevailing Supreme Court
authority. Likewise, only medical abortions and provision of abortifacients are singled out for restrictions. In
effect, this is the legislature substituting its bias against abortion care for women’s right to choose and the
judgment of medical professionals who have determined medical abortions may be provided safely via
telemedicine.
Please expand medical services via telemedicine to underserved areas of our state. But do not unjustifiably
restrict access to medical abortion services via telemedicine in the process.
If there are questions I will do my best to provide answers.
Thank you.

Trust Women Foundation
Post Office Box 3222 | Wichita, Kansas 67201 | 316.425.3215 | www.itrustwomen.org

