Testimony in support of HB 2031
Hilary Gee, Kansas Government Relations Director
American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network
February 7, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
The American Cancer Society Action Network (ACS CAN) appreciates the opportunity to offer our support
for House Bill 2031. ACS CAN, the nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy affiliate of the American Cancer Society,
supports evidence-based policy and legislative solutions designed to eliminate cancer as a major health
problem. As the nation’s leading advocate for public policies that are helping to defeat cancer, ACS CAN
ensures that cancer patients, survivors, and their families have a voice in public policy matters at all levels
of government.
Quality of life is a problem for the thousands of Kansas families currently facing serious illnesses, like
cancer. Advances in cancer research continue to provide new and more effective treatments for cancer, but
therapies do not meet all the needs of cancer patients. In additional to treating the primary disease,
patients also need treatment for other issues like fatigue, emotional distress or nausea. Palliative care is
about treating the patient as well as the disease. It’s a big shift in focus for health care delivery—and it
works.
Palliative care is focused on providing the best possible quality of life for a patient and their family by
offering relief from pain, stress and other symptoms of serious chronic illness. Patient and familycentered palliative care sees the person beyond the cancer treatment. It brings trained specialists together
with doctors and nurses in a team-based approach to improve quality of life during serious illness, explain
treatment options, and manage symptoms like pain, nausea, and fatigue. Palliative care is appropriate
during treatment, survivorship and beyond.
While the benefits of palliative care are clear, there are barriers to Kansas families receiving this type of
support. Just 48% of Kansas hospitals have palliative care teams. Among the smaller hospitals in our state
that falls to just 24%.i
Lack of understanding about palliative care, both what it is and when it should be provided, remains one of
the chief barriers preventing access to it. Most of the general public is not at all knowledgeable about
palliative care – 70% of people when asked were completely unfamiliar with the services palliative care
provides to patients. Additionally, despite the rising body of evidence showing its benefits, many
professionals mistakenly equate palliative care with end of life and hospice care. ii
HB 2031 will address both of these challenges. The state advisory council on palliative care will bring
together experts in palliative care to identify challenges to palliative care delivery and innovative solutions
to address the needs of families across the state. The palliative care consumer and professional information
program will help to maximize the effectiveness of palliative care in the state by ensuring that
comprehensive and accurate information is available to the public, health care providers, and health care
facilities. Make today better for Kansans facing serious illnesses and support HB 2031.
i

ii

Center to Advance Palliative Care 2015 State-by-State Report Card

Center to Advance Palliative Care: 2011 Public Opinion Research on Palliative Care: A Report Based on Research by Public Opinion Strategies.
http://www.capc.org/tools-forpalliative-care-programs/marketing/public-opinion-research/2011-public-opinionresearch-on-palliative-care.pdf

