Testimony To the
House Health and Human Services Committee
Presented by Leo Herrman, Ph.D.
On Behalf of
The Kansas Association of Masters in Psychology
February 1, 2018
Mister Chairman, Members of the Committee:
My name is Leo Herrman, and I am President Elect of the Kansas Association of Masters in
Psychology. The Kansas Association of Masters in Psychology (KAMP) is comprised of Masters
Level Psychologists and Clinical Psychotherapists interested in general healthcare issues,
credentialing, mental health, and issues that would impact Masters Level Psychologists, Clinical
Psychotherapists or their patients.
KAMP supports the measures outlined in House Bill No. 2512. We would support any legislation
providing such reimbursement for telemedicine as long as actions proposed in the bill apply to
mental health treatment by Kansas Behavioral Sciences Regulatory Board licensees. Telemedicinedelivered health care services are viewed as an integral and necessary part of adequate mental
health services to citizens of the State, and are particularly essential in the more rural areas of
Kansas where Licensed Master Level Psychologists and Licensed Clinical Psychotherapists provide
the predominant amount of psychological services. The Governor’s Behavioral Health Services
Planning Council Rural and Frontier Subcommittee in their 2017 Annual Report recommended the
following:
• “…technology itself is no longer the barrier to use. Perceptions of technology and
related local and state legislation and organizational policy are now the more
significant barrier.” (R/F Subcommittee, Fy2016 Annual Report pg. 5, 2c)
• Actively championing use of telemental health to address barriers to receiving
behavioral health services – like workforce shortage and transportation.
• Established partnership with KU Center for Telemedicine & Telehealth, and the
Heartland Resource Center. 12.1.16
• Planning Telehealth Use Survey to explore telehealth as a tool for delivering an
alternative service – especially for the elderly. 1.26.17
A bill insuring that the proper supports for telehealth provided services by Masters Level
Psychologists and Clinical Psychotherapists is viewed as an essential step towards meeting the
needs of the people we serve.
Thank you very much for permitting me to provide this written testimony.

