February 1, 2018

Health and Human Services Committee Members,

Honorable Members,
I am writing to you today on behalf of the Kansas Coordination Council on Early Childhood Developmental
Services (SICC). The SICC is an advisory group based in both state and federal law. This council is responsible
for advising and assisting the Kansas governor and legislature on matters that impact Kansas families with
children, ages birth to five who have, or are at risk for, developmental delays and to ensure that a comprehensive
service delivery system of integrated services is available in Kansas for these children.
One potential component of a comprehensive system of integrated services for young children with disabilities and
their families can be the use of distance technology. This technology can be a part of addressing challenges that
Kansas faces, including, delivering services in rural and remote counties, travel time for professionals and travel
costs, adverse weather, and service meeting cancellations. Research has demonstrated that this is an effective
delivery system for healthcare services and for programs serving young children with disabilities and that this
method of service delivery can have positive results that are comparable to face-to-face services. Additionally,
most families respond positively to services delivered in this manner, in the ability to utilize the technology, ability
to follow-through on service recommendations, and satisfaction.
We would urge that the Committee consider additional and inclusive language to HB2512 that would allow both
school and community-based programs for infants/toddlers and special education students to be able to receive
reimbursement for telemedicine services. This would include related therapy services that are critical to a wellrounded individualized plan for many children.
If you would like additional information, please do not hesitate to contact the Council.

Sincerely

Matt Connell
Chair, Kansas Coordinating Council on Early Childhood Developmental Services

