TESTIMONY OF
VIGNESH GANAPATHY
POLICY DIRECTOR, AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION OF KANSAS
IN OPPOSITION TO HB 2512
KANSAS HOUSE COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
FEBRUARY 1, 2018

Thank you, Chair Hawkins, and members of the Health and Human Services Committee for affording us
the opportunity to provide testimony on HB 2512.
The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) of Kansas is a non-partisan, non-political membership
organization dedicated to preserving and strengthening the constitutional liberties afforded to every
resident of Kansas. We work to preserve and strengthen our constitutional rights and freedoms through
policy advocacy, litigation, and education. We proudly serve over 30,000 supporters in Kansas and
represent more than 1.6 million supporters nationwide.
The ACLU of Kansas strongly opposes HB 2512. While this bill would promote health care access by
establishing telemedicine as a means of health care delivery with the patient and provider in different
locations, HB 2512 fails to extend this to the constitutionally protected right to abortion and related
reproductive health services. Further, this bill raises serious discriminatory, constitutional concerns, by
limiting a woman’s health care access because of where she resides. Specifically, the ACLU of Kansas
opposes HB 2512 because:


This bill would prevent women in rural Kansas from accessing essential reproductive health
services. A woman’s constitutional rights should not depend on her zip code. But HB 2512 would
make it so that women in some parts of the state have diminished access to essential reproductive
health care. According to the Guttmacher Institute, one in five Kansas women must travel more
than 180 miles in order to receive an reproductive health services, and often over 500 miles to
receive an abortion.i The distance may be even further for providers who accept KanCare.
Telemedicine has benefitted women in rural areas across the country by allowing patients to take
the abortion pill—mifepristone and misoprostol—under the supervision of doctors through an
online help desk, and these procedures have had similar results to in-person abortions.ii Without
access, many women may resort to unregulated and unsafe methods of abortion, such as
procuring the abortion pill from online sources. By carving out abortion, this bill threatens the
health, safety and well-being of women in rural Kansas.



HB 2512 places politics above a woman's health. We simply cannot know each woman's
circumstances; but we do know that health care professionals should be able to provide the best
care for each individual patient. While we laud this bill’s goal of increasing access to health
services, it excludes only one, constitutionally protected, medical procedure. HB 2512 would

6701 W. 64 Street, Suite 210 | Overland Park, KS 66202 | 913.490.4100 | www.aclukansas.org
th

interfere with access to a health care professional's expertise and impose politics in its place. This
bill not only infringes upon the relationship between a doctor and a patient, but prevents it from
taking place all together, by preventing the doctor from providing particular health care protocols
appropriate to the individual circumstances faced by a patient. In difficult circumstances, a
woman deserves the best medical care available—and the freedom to make decisions about that
care, in partnership with a doctor—not unnecessary restrictions on access to that care.
By preventing access to safe and legal health care, this bill is a distraction focused on the wrong priority
and an unwarranted intrusion into the personal health care decisions of women. Therefore, we urge this
committee to oppose HB 2512.

i

Guttmacher Institute, Fact Sheet: Unintended Pregnancy in the United States (Sep. 2016),
https://www.guttmacher.org/fact-sheet/unintended-pregnancy-united-states.
ii
Ushma D Upadhyay, Innovative models are needed for equitable abortion access in the USA, The Lancet Public
Health (Oct. 3, 2017), http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpub/article/PIIS2468-2667(17)30181-0/fulltext.

