January 29, 2018
Mr. Chairman, Members of the Committee:
My name is Janine Gracy, and I am the Project Director for the Heartland Telehealth Resource
Center serving Kansas, Missouri and Oklahoma, a program of the University of Kansas Medical
Center. I want to emphasize that the perspectives in this testimony represent the views of the
Center for Telemedicine and Telehealth and do not represent the official policy of the University
of Kansas Medical Center, the views of university administration, or the views of the granting
agency.
Telehealth Resource Centers (TRCs) were to provide assistance, education and information to
organizations and individuals who are actively providing or interested in providing healthcare at
a distance. Our simple charter from the Federal Office for Advancement of Telehealth is to
assist in expanding the availability of health care to underserved populations. And because we
are federally funded, our input is educational in scope.
Lawmakers in 35 states have passed telehealth parity laws (See map on next page). HB2512 is
a step forward for Telehealth in Kansas. However, there are items that can be improved. This
bill appears to narrowly limit the type of health care provider by definition that can practice
telemedicine in Section 2 (d). Most states use the terminology “Health Care Provider” and
define it as a duly licensed hospital or other licensed facility, physician, or other health care
professional authorized to furnish health care services in the State within the scope of the
professional’s license. Missing in HB 2512 are APRNs/NPs licensed by the Kansas State Board
of Nursing.
Telemedicine is generally divided into 3 categories: Interactive; Store and Forward; and
Remote Patient Monitoring. In Section 2 (h) telemedicine is defined, but Remote Patient
Monitoring appears to be missing.
Patients and health care providers benefit from policy improvements that promote transparency
and predictability regarding telehealth services. By creating regulations that enhance access to
care and reimbursement to health care providers, Kansas citizens benefit from your thoughtful
considerations. As you move forward, Heartland Telehealth Resource Center is happy to be a
resource for you concerning telehealth.
Respectfully,

Janine L. Gracy

www.heartlandtrc.org

877-643-HTRC (4872)

States with Parity Laws for Private Insurance Coverage of Telemedicine
(October 2017)

www.heartlandtrc.org

877-643-HTRC (4872)

