House Health and Human Services Committee

Written Testimony on HB 2512 – Telemedicine
Alexia Foster
President, Tiny-k Alliance
February 1, 2018
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony on HB 2512 regarding
telemedicine. The Tiny-k Alliance supports the intent of the bill, but respectfully requests that
the committee expand the scope of telemedicine services to include occupational, physical and
speech-language therapies.
The bill, as we understand it, limits coverage parity and continuity of care to physicians and
mental health providers that are licensed under the Behavioral Science Regulatory Board. As a
result, many of the medically based therapies needed by infants and toddlers with disabilities
would not be covered.
The Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA) requires that children with disabilities receive
necessary services – they can be delivered in a home, community or school-based setting.
Telemedicine offers an opportunity for a more efficient delivery model, especially in those
areas where there is a shortage of qualified professionals.
Again, we appreciate the opportunity to offer testimony and urge the committee to expand the
scope of telemedicine services to include occupational, physical and speech-language therapies
so that we can best meet the needs of those infants and toddlers with disabilities.
If you have any additional questions, please feel free to contact me. I am the Assistant
Coordinator for Rainbows United, Infant and Toddler Services of Sedgwick County, a Tiny-k
network, and can be reached at (316) 945-7117 or at afoster@rui.org.

The Tiny-k Alliance is a statewide organization that supports the 33 Kansas providers of
early intervention services for infants and toddlers with special needs.
The Tiny-k Alliance promotes high-quality services and sound public policy for infants with
developmental disabilities through advocacy, resource development and strategic partnerships.

