Thomas L. Bell
President

To:

House Health and Human Services Committee

From: Chad Austin
Senior Vice President Government Relations
Date: February 1, 2018
Re:

House Bill 2512

The Kansas Hospital Association appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on House Bill
2512. Telemedicine is an important tool in providing access to needed health care services. It is
the belief of our members that through the advancement of this technology and its utilization,
Kansans will experience high quality, accessible care regardless of residing in a rural or urban
locality.
Telemedicine brings many benefits to Kansas from a variety of perspectives. Patients have
increased access to services that may not be readily available in their community. This access to
care is not only more convenient to the patient, but also may reduce long term health care costs
associated with treatment avoidance due to lack of available services. Physicians and other health
care providers realize benefits with telemedicine as well. It provides clinical support when needed
as well as local coverage in areas that may have health care provider shortages. The community
and employer benefits that are achieved through telemedicine are notable as well. Communities not
only have access to services that may not otherwise be as readily available, but it also keeps the
healthcare dollar in the local community. Employers realize benefits through telemedicine as the
amount of “lost work” time is reduced since healthcare may be provided locally.
With all of the benefits that may be attained through embracing telemedicine, one may wonder what
has prevented this technology from being more widely used. While there continues to be some
clinical, legal, and social barriers that remain, the primary reason that is constraining the widespread
use of telemedicine is coverage. According to the American Telemedicine Association, more than
half of the states across the U.S. have implemented some form of coverage parity for telemedicine
services. In essence, coverage parity provides reimbursement for telemedicine services regardless
if the service is delivered in a face-to-face setting or through telemedicine. The recognition of
telemedicine services has varied among public and private payers. At present, Medicare and
Medicaid typically provides some level of coverage and reimbursement for the distant site facility
and the professional services. However, the level of coverage by commercial insurance carriers is
much more varied.
Kansas Hospital Association

215 SE 8th Ave.  PO Box 2308  Topeka, KS 66601-2308  (785) 233-7436  FAX: (785) 233-6955  www.kha-net.org

In regards to House Bill 2512, KHA would like to share some additional thoughts. Specifically, we
would like to receive clarification that physician assistants and advanced practice registered nurses
would be included in the legislation. These professions, as well as others, are instrumental in
hospitals utilizing telemedicine services. Further, while KHA recognizes that telemedicine may
increase access to needed services throughout the state, we must also avoid any unintended
consequences that may displace health care providers in rural areas.
KHA believes every Kansan deserves access to quality health care. Telemedicine is one way to
ensure that our rural communities have the same access to health services as urban areas. The rural
nature of our state coupled with the anticipated health care workforce shortages in future years
makes encouraging telemedicine programs in Kansas imperative.
Thank you for your consideration of our comments.

