7570 W 21st ST N
Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104
Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President

John Feehan, MD FAAFP
Olathe

President-Elect

Jeremy Presley, MD
Dodge City

Vice President

Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Testimony: House Bill 2512, Telemedicine
House Health and Human Services Committee
Presented by Chad Johanning MD, Gov. Adv. Committee Chair & Elected Secretary
February 1, 2018

Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to submit these comments regarding
telemedicine on behalf of the Kansas Academy of Family Physicians (KAFP). My
name is Chad Johanning and I practice family medicine in Lawrence, Kansas. Our
organization represents over 1,730 active, resident, student and life members
across the state. The mission of the KAFP is to support and serve family
physicians of Kansas as they advance the health of Kansans.

Secretary

Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP
Lawrence

Treasurer

Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres. / Board Chair

Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

AAFP Delegates

Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates

Doug Gruenbacher, MD
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors

Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Jared Johnson, MD, Wichita
Sabrina Markese, MD
Kansas City
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Graig Nickel, MD, FAAFP
Lawrence
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD
Smith Center
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD
Kansas City

Resident Representative

Our national organization, the American Academy of Family Physicians,
states: “AAFP supports expanded use of telemedicine as an appropriate and
efficient means of improving health, when conducted within the context of
appropriate standards of care. Payment models should support patient freedom
to choose how they wish to receive services. Additionally, payment models should
support the physician’s ability to direct the patient toward the appropriate
service modality in accordance with the current standard of care.”
Principles by which we believe telemedicine should be practiced
We believe these core principles should underpin the implementation of
telemedicine in Kansas. Like all other patient care, care delivered via
telemedicine should:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Based upon these principles, we believe that those who provide medical care
electronically should:
•

Jonathan Pike, MD, Via Christi
Family Medicine Residency

Student Representative

Marissa Weaver KUSM-Wichita

Executive Vice President

Place patient welfare first
Maintain acceptable & appropriate standards of practice
Adhere to recognized ethical codes governing the medical profession
Properly supervise non-physician clinicians
Protect patient confidentiality

•
•

Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

•

Establish an appropriate physician-patient relationship including informed
consent, identification, verification & authentication of location for both
parties, and disclosure of applicable credentials.
Have an emergency plan for referral to an acute care facility or ER.
Provide continuity of care in which a patient can seek follow-up care or
information.
Establish a medical record that includes copies of all patient-related
electronic communications, prescriptions, laboratory and test results,

•
•
•

•
•

evaluations and consultations, records of past care, informed consent and instructions.
Such record must be accessible and documented for both the physician and the patient,
consistent with all established laws and regulations governing patient healthcare records.
Meet or exceed applicable legal requirements of medical/health information privacy.
Protect transmissions, including patient e-mail, prescriptions, and laboratory results
securely.
Implement measures for prescribing to uphold patient safety in the absence of traditional
physical examination, guaranteeing that the identity of the patient and provider is clearly
established and that detailed documentation for the clinical evaluation & resulting
prescription is enforced and independently kept. Integration with e-Prescription services
that help assure informed, accurate and prevention of errors are preferable.
Use the same ethical and professional standards for care provided electronically as s/he
does for in-person care. We believe that everyone should have a medical home they can
access in person if a telemedicine visit is not adequate to provide the standard of care.
Ideally, establishing a patient-physician relationship means meeting in-person before a
telemedicine appointment. While this is not always possible we believe it provides the best
quality of care.

Licensure
With technology’s ability to span state borders, provider licensure portability is a key issue that
states are examining to expand access and improve efficiency in the existing workforce.
Policymakers are addressing practice across state lines through various mechanisms, including
reciprocity with other states and interstate compacts. Kansas is one of 17 states that has an
Interstate Medical Licensure Compact, which enables full licensure authority.
Summary

Legislation to regulate the challenges that accompany the use of telemedicine in Kansas is very
much appreciated. Protecting the patient through maintaining the standard of care, privacy
considerations, and continuity of care cannot be emphasized enough. Telemedicine legislation
must also protect the privileged relationship between patient and primary care
physician. While telemedicine is a great technological tool, it is a tool that cannot replace the
relationship between patient and primary physician. This relationship facilitates not only
establishing a diagnosis (which is within the realm of telemedicine), but also treating the illness
(how a patient copes with a diagnosis in the context of their environment). This relationship
must not be compromised. Telemedicine legislation should be inclusive and protective of the
relationship between patient and primary care physician.
Thank you for your ongoing efforts to develop legislation that promotes the controlled
evolution of telemedicine in the state of Kansas and for the opportunity to provide comments.

