Testimony to House Committee on Health and Human Services
on House Bill 2512
534 S. Kansas Ave, Suite 330, Topeka, Kansas 66603
Telephone: 785-234-4773 / Fax: 785-234-3189
www.acmhck.org

February 1, 2018

Mister Chairman and members of the Committee, my name is Colin Thomasset. I am the Associate Director for
the Association of Community Mental Health Centers of Kansas, Inc. The Association represents the 26
licensed Community Mental Health Centers (CMHCs) in Kansas that provide behavioral health services in all
105 counties, 24-hours a day, seven days a week. In Kansas, CMHCs are the local Mental Health Authorities
coordinating the delivery of publicly funded community-based mental health services. As part of licensing
regulations, CMHCs are required to provide services to all Kansans needing them, regardless of their ability to
pay. This makes the community mental health system the “safety net” for Kansans with mental health needs.
Our Association appreciates the opportunity to testify today in support of HB 2512 relating to the coverage of
telemedicine and parity for treatment provided in this manner. We applaud the recognition that with Kansas
being a rural state and with the technological advances that have occurred, that all persons should have
access to health care regardless of where they live. Healthcare access, quality, and cost are all improved with
the availability and delivery of telemedicine.
When permitted and needed, CMHCs across the State very effectively and with strong patient satisfaction
provide psychiatry and therapy via televideo to those we serve that otherwise may suffer from unnecessary
mental health challenges and hospitalizations. CMHCs across Kansas have been providing telemedicine
services for as many as twenty years as part of ensuring that we have a mental health safety net and we have
a vested interest in making sure that our patients receive the highest quality healthcare services, whether
provided in person or via televideo.
By providing these telemedicine services to our patients, we are improving their access to our treatment,
reducing consumer and organization costs, and providing quality services that help them better manage their
mental health needs in their home and community settings, which reduces the need for a more restrictive and
expensive level of care such as hospitalization.
We face a serious psychiatry shortage across Kansas, and we applaud this Committee’s work last year on
helping us to address this crisis by amending the Medical Student and Resident Loan Assistance Act to include
psychiatry for medical student loan repayment. That was a critical step, but we also need to utilize our existing
workforce in the most effective manner possible, which means utilizing telemedicine to bring psychiatry to the
majority of counties in Kansas where there is no physical psychiatrist present.
We feel that HB 2512 is a major step forward in providing coverage parity for telemedicine services. CMHCs
have routinely faced insurance hurdles in providing these services, and a bill addressing these issues is long
overdue.
While very supportive of the concepts contained in HB 2512, we have a number of concerns that we would like
the Committee to be aware of.
We would ask the Committee to discuss and consider amending the language found on page 2, Sec 3. (d) as it
relates to providing clinical reports to primary care or other treating physicians within 72 hours. CMHCs have
been leaders in whole-person integrated care, and nowhere was this more evidenced than with the Medicaid
Health Homes program three years ago. Over 20,000 Kansans were served under this program where we

worked to ensure that persons with serious mental illness were provided linkages and supports with needed
medical and social services. We applaud the intent of this language, but feel like as it is currently written, this
idea may be unworkable. Primarily, this is not a requirement that currently exists when we see a patient faceto-face. Additional questions include:
• What type of information would we need to send?
• Would every mental health service we provide need to be sent, including therapy notes?
• Would that information need to be sent to all treating physicians, or could the patient pick and choose?
• If a patient consents, does that mean all information goes to every treating physician every time? Also,
is it appropriate for those physicians to see all of those treatment notes?
• What will be the method of transferring these reports?
• Is 72 hours a clinical gold standard for this type of information exchange?
CMHCs would appreciate receiving reports when one of our patients utilize a telemedicine service outside of
the CMHC, so it is not that we do not think this idea has merit, it certainly does. However, we need to figure out
how to make it workable across the health care provider network. We understand that this section only applies
to when the patient consents, but considering the sensitive nature of the services we provide, along with the
still-present stigma that exists for patients to access mental health services, we would ask the committee to
ensure that privacy is a top priority as it relates to this section in the bill.
We would like further clarification regarding the status of Advance Practice Registered Nurses (APRNs) and
Physician Assistants (PAs). We utilize clinicians with these high-level credentials often while providing
medication management services via televideo. There is language on page 2, line 40 in the bill relating to
services provided “under the supervision of a physician” which may be meant to imply that services provided
by APRNs and PAs is indeed covered in the bill. However, we would ask that it be more clearly spelled out that
services provided by these professionals be allowed. Not having these professionals covered under this bill
would disadvantage CMHCs, especially those in rural areas where you oftentimes will have APRNs and PAs
performing medication management and other medical services with a collaborative practice agreement for
APRNs and under the supervision of a psychiatrist as it relates to PAs. We would propose that language be
added to the bill that would explicitly reference both APRNs and PAs and ensure they are included as
healthcare providers as defined in the bill.
We feel that both of these concerns can be addressed within the bill. We would be glad to work with all the
stakeholders on making sure that we have the best possible legislative language moving forward. We ask the
Committee to continue work on this important legislation which would remove barriers to health care access for
some of our most vulnerable citizens.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Committee today, and I will stand for questions at the
appropriate time.

2

