Testimony in Support of HB2031 – The Palliative Care and Quality of Life Advisory Council
Committee on Healthy and Human Services
Tuesday, February 07, 2017
1:30 PM Room 546-S, Capitol Building, Topeka, KS
John G. Carney (jcarney@practicalbioethics.org)
President and CEO
Center for Practical Bioethics
Kansas City
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to speak in favor of House Bill 2031 to create the palliative care and
quality of life interdisciplinary advisory council. This council will serve to benefit the citizens of Kansas in
myriad ways by helping individual healthcare consumers to understand better the options they have in
accessing appropriate services to match their values and preferences regardless of the diagnosis,
treatment options or conditions with which they live, so they may live longer and more productive lives.
This measure can also assist healthcare professionals by further promoting and demonstrating the
benefits of team based care and constant attention being given to patient’s involvement in achieving
better outcomes.
Palliative care is still a poorly understood service by the general population, often overly identified with
hospice care, with which it shares some tenets but is not identical.
In an effort to provide those distinctions we respectfully request that the Committee consider
additional clarification under Sec(b)(1)(C) that identifies other health conditions beyond hospice that
require intense palliative care involvement such as “advanced illness, and chronic disease and conditions
that require significant attention to symptom control to improve patient function and health outcomes.”
The bill provides ample opportunities for the interdisciplinary nature of palliative care to be reflected in
the appointments to the council. However, given the nature of the focus on patient involvement in
shared decision-making and active participation by the patient in setting goals of care - a hallmark of
palliative care– the advisory council should have at least one member designated as representing the
patient/family perspective. There are many qualified individuals and patient advocates who could
assume that role. To populate the council with only healthcare professionals would give the impression
of once again diminishing the critical aspect of patient centeredness that palliative care works so hard to
protect.
One caution we would ask the Committee to consider is the over-dependence in statutory language
under Section 2(b)(1) by identifying the “website” as the mechanism for distribution of information. We
would recommend using such language as “utilizing electronic means” as a substitute for manner and
methods we use to share palliative care resources, education, and services.
Thank you for the opportunity to share this testimony with you and we commend the committee for
consideration of this important legislation.
Respectfully Submitted
John G. Carney
President and CEO, Center for Practical Bioethics

