February 6, 2018
Chairman Daniel Hawkins
Health and Human Resources Committee
Kansas State Capitol
Topeka, KS 66612
RE:

HB 2573 – Providing for study and investigation of maternal deaths by the secretary of
health and environment.

The Kansas Affiliate of the American College of Nurse-Midwives (ACNM) represents Certified
Nurse-Midwives (CNMs) in Kansas. We support HB 2573 as proposed by the American College
of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG).
Certified Nurse-Midwives (CNMs), Obstetrician/Gynecologists (OB/GYNs), and family
medicine physicians work collaboratively to provide care to the women of Kansas. Together, we
are all interested in providing the safest care for pregnant women and new mothers and
preventing poor pregnancy outcomes is one such way that we can provide this care.
“Maternal mortality surveillance is needed to identify and address the factors contributing to
poor pregnancy outcomes for women. Though it requires an investment of time and resources, a
structured death review process can be a powerful facilitator of state systems change to improve
the health of women before, during and after pregnancy”.1
With an established Maternal Mortality Review Committee, “teams composed of experts from a
variety of disciplines work together to identify what happened and why”.2 These teams,
comprised of physicians, nurses, nurse-midwives, and other stakeholders would review
psychosocial, clinical, and medical factors and propose interventions that could reduce the
likelihood of a similar death occurring in the future. This is important for the health and safety of
Kansan women.
Sincerely,
Board of Directors
Kansas Affiliate, American College of Nurse-Midwives
1

2

Association of Maternal & Child Health Programs. (no date). MMR Resource Portal for States: Building Capacity for Maternal
Mortality Review. Retrieved from: http://www.amchp.org/programsandtopics/womenshealth/Focus%20Areas/MMR/Pages/default.aspx.
National Women’s Health Network. (April 2015). Maternal Mortality Review-Each Death Matters. Retrieved from
https://www.nwhn.org/maternal-mortality-review-each-death-matters/.

