Testimony on House Bill 2573
House Health and Human Services Committee
Rachel Sisson, Director
Bureau of Family Health
Kansas Department of Health and Environment
February 12, 2018
Chair Hawkins and Members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to provide written testimony in
support of HB 2573. As proposed, HB 2573 amends existing public health law (K.S.A. 65-177) as necessary to
strengthen efforts related to monitoring maternal health including maternal and pregnancy-associated death.
Specifically, the bill grants the Department access to all necessary information to implement a comprehensive
process to review each death and protects all people, records, and interviews obtained as part of each review.
Additionally, the bill allows for routine compilation and wide distribution of aggregate, non-individually
identifiable data to further the study of causes and problems associated with maternal deaths. This
comprehensive process leads to informed, data-driven recommendations for actions that reduce death and
support health and wellness during the pregnancy, childbirth, and postpartum periods.
Maternal mortality, defined as the death of a woman during pregnancy or within one year of the end of
pregnancy, is considered a patient safety event that warrants close attention. Within the population of women of
reproductive age, maternal mortality is an indicator monitored by the Department pursuant to K.S.A. 65-177. In
2016, there were 20 maternal and pregnancy-associated maternal deaths reported in Kansas, an increase of eight
deaths compared to 2015 (Source: KDHE Bureau of Epidemiology & Public Health Informatics). Maternal
mortality in the U.S. continues to increase, and there is not one known cause. Data from the Centers for Disease
Control & Prevention (CDC) Pregnancy Mortality Surveillance System indicate that pregnancy-related
mortality increased by 20% between 2000 and 2013. An increasing national and state trend in maternal
mortality indicates the need to conduct maternal mortality review in order to gain insight into the medical and
social factors leading to these events and to prevent future occurrences.
Approximately half of states in the U.S. have a comprehensive maternal mortality review process, the gold
standard for maternal and pregnancy-associated death surveillance—Kansas aims to achieve the same. As part
of the process, a review committee gathers extensive information about each individual case of maternal death
and synthesizes information to determine if the death was preventable and what specific and feasible actions, if
implemented or altered, might have changed the course of events. Committee membership includes a vast array
of professionals and partners engaging with and serving women during pregnancy and the year postpartum.
Collectively, they examine patient/family, community, provider, facility, and system factors that lead to a
woman’s death. More information about the state maternal mortality review process is available online at
www.reviewtoaction.org.
Thank you for the opportunity to share the critical importance of this bill.

