Committee on Health and Human Services
House Bill 2527
Tuesday, February 13 1:30pm
Hearing Room 546-S
Presented by Greggory Pfister
The Foundation for Government Accountability

Good afternoon, Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee.
My name is Gregg Pfister and I am with the Foundation for Government Accountability. The
FGA is a 501c3 non-partisan think tank; we specialize in health and welfare policy, and we work
with legislators from across the country to help strengthen local communities and protect
families.
Today, I would like to start with a story that was featured on NBC Nightly News.
There is a middle-aged woman named Jenny, who suffers from Crohn’s disease. While
constantly worrying about managing her disease and its painful symptoms, she would undergo
infusions at a local hospital where the bill was $40,000 per treatment, every 8 weeks, and she
paid a $30 co-pay every visit. Even with generous insurance, the costs added up and the huge
bills pushed premiums higher.
Under a program very similar to what is contained in HB 2527, Jenny switched to a provider that
charges 90% less, and in return she gets paid $500 per visit and pays no copay. Same drug, same
delivery, same frequency, but higher quality one-on-one care at a fraction of the cost.
The bill before you today, HB 2527, represents some of the best practices that we have observed
in other states. It is similar to policy that exists in Arizona, Florida, Kentucky, Maine,
Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and soon, here in Kansas for state employees.
When talking about healthcare, there are two consistent problems that consumers face: a lack of
transparency and the incentive to shop around for the best deal from a provider. The vast
majority of people find the whole process frustrating and confusing, because it is.
The unfortunate result is that consumers pay higher out of pocket expenses and contribute to the
rising cost of healthcare by not rewarding innovation and lower cost options. Patients also face
narrowing networks from provider consolidation that often exclude independent or smaller
providers for non-quality related reasons.

1

In what other industry do consumers consider themselves well informed when they make a
decision without understanding the price? A procedure like an MRI can have thousands of
dollars of difference in price at different facilities within a couple of miles, even though they are
using the same type of machine and the same technician. Where you park your car matters.
HB 2527 has three components.
The first is the “Right to Know” - Patients should be able to find out the estimated price ahead of
time from their insurance plan and compare providers to find one that works for them.
The second is the “Right to Save” - Patients have the right to share in savings if they shop for a
high-value provider.
The third is the “Right to Pick” - Patients have the right to access a high-value provider whether that provider is in or out-of network.
Practically, what this looks like:
1. A doctor recommends a non-emergency medical service
2. A patient can call, go online, or use an app to find their best options and choose the best
location at the best value
3. Then the patient can have their procedure at the location of their choice and cash in on the
shared savings. If the patient chooses a high quality, lower cost provider below the average cost
of a procedure, the patient gets to keep a percentage the savings - giving them “skin in the
game.”
Claims analysis by transparency companies estimate that in Kansas, about $9 billion of medical
spending is shoppable.
Recent national polling found 8 out of 10 voters want to know the cost ahead of time, 7 out of 10
support rewarding patients for using a high-value provider, two key pieces of this bill.
The Virginia Department of Human Resource Management actually studied this program last
year for their state employees and issued a report in November saying that shared savings
programs “hold(s) great promise” and are “a valuable, no-risk tool for lowering costs without
sacrificing quality.” The state is projecting to save $4.5-$6 million a year. So, if it holds potential
for public employees, and is no risk, why should it be denied to small businesses and individuals
in your district now?
In Maine, the general assembly embraced this program and passed it unanimously through the
legislature - extending it beyond state employees, to everyone. Plans are now on the market with
2

incentives a year ahead of schedule; in large part because 98% of insurers already have
transparency tools; the problem is that only 2% of patients have every used them.
Earlier I mentioned the NBC Nightly News story about Jenny. Jenny lives in New Hampshire
and based on her experience, she now regularly encourages her co-workers to use the shared
savings program.
New Hampshire’s tiny program has already resulted in:
$14+ million in savings;
$1.2+ million dollars in patient incentive payments (shared savings)
and they are just scratching the surface.
Thank you for your time, and I would happy to answer any questions you may have.

3

