February 6, 2018
Chairman Hawkins and Members of House Health and Human Services Committee,
KABC appreciates the opportunity to testify in support of HB 2590 and the State Long-Term Care Ombuds
program.
I am Mitzi McFatrich, executive director of Kansas Advocates for Better Care (KABC). KABC is a non-profit
organization, which advocates with and on behalf of older Kansans for better quality long-term care, at home
and in facilities. KABC is beholden to no commercial interests, supported almost entirely by citizen
contributions. KABC does not provide any form of direct care or receive any government funding. KABC is an
established resource for older adults on long-term care issues. Those seeking our guidance and assistance are
primarily elders and their families facing difficult, life-altering decisions.
Kansas established an independent State Long Term Care Ombuds program which serves older adults and
adults with disabilities who live in the nursing, assisted, and residential health care facilities, as well as the
Home Plus and Boarding Care Homes in our state. In 1998 Kansas implemented statutory changes to assure the
independence of the Office in fulfilling its duty to investigate resident complaints and advocate for resolutions
residents seek.
Recently and for the first time since the early 1990’s, the U. S. Administration on Aging issued new rules which
govern the State Long-Term Care Ombuds program. The revisions contained in HB 2590 will help Kansas’
program come in to compliance with the requirements set forth in the new federal rule.
KABC supports the revisions which prohibit Ombudspersons from receiving gifts from those involved in
investigations or from those receiving services from the Ombuds program. KABC supports the bills provisions
which define and remediate conflicts of interest regarding appointees to the Office. KABC also supports the
requirements which further professionalize the Office; and those which confirm that Ombudspersons are able
with permission of the resident or their representative, to access resident records needed to further the
investigation of a resident complaint.
The State Long Term Care Ombuds Office and program, play an important roll in advocating for individual
residents, as well as in defining areas of deficit or for improvement and making recommendations related to
State long-term care policies and services, elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation, and the rights of residents in
licensed adult care homes.

Mitzi E. McFatrich, on behalf of volunteers, members and older Kansans
536 Fireside Ct., Lawrence, KS 66049. mitzim@kabc.org or info@kabc.org 1-800-525-1782 www.kabc.org

1

