KANSAS
KA
ANSAS
ANSAS
MED
DICAL
MEDICAL
KANSAS
SOC
CIETY
SOCIETY
Esstablished 1859
MEDICAL
SOCIETY
To:

House Health and Human Services Committee

From:

Rachelle Colombo
Director of Government Affairs, Kansas Medical Society

Date:

February 8, 2018

Re:

HB 2591; concerning the Kansas medical assistance program

The Kansas Medical Society appreciates the opportunity to provide comments in support
of HB 2591, which requires legislative approval prior to securing new contracts for the
Kansas medical assistance program, KanCare. Since its inception, KMS has been
supportive of efforts to move the Medicaid population into a managed care system. This
support has been based, in large part, on the goal of improving health outcomes and
access while avoiding cost-shifting onto providers.
Unfortunately, the transition to managed care has not been without difficulty for
providers and patients and many inefficient processes and long-standing problems have
yet to be fully resolved. Late in 2016, in the fifth year of the program’s existence, it was
declared non-compliant with Federal law. At the same time, provider reimbursement
rates were reduced despite a previous commitment to maintain and improve
reimbursement rates. As a result, KMS joined with other provider groups to introduce
HB 2069 and SB 69 (combined into HB 2026) to rectify systemic issues that have failed
to resolve and continue to prove problematic for providers over the life of the program.
The bill focused on uniform standards, credentialing processes, clear guidelines for prior
authorizations and a timely appeals process in an effort to ensure continued provider
participation. Additionally, requirements to improve communication and education
regarding MCO billing practices were addressed. Though the bill passed with strong
support from the legislature, recent review of the newly passed measures reveals that
KanCare has failed to resolve several of these long-standing issues sufficiently.
KMS has endeavored to provide continued, clear communication about issues affecting
provider participation to both the legislature and administration so as to encourage the
program’s ability to provide healthcare access for vulnerable Kansans. This has included
participation in the Lieutenant Governor’s Health Care Work group and various other
stakeholder meetings to discuss and resolve ongoing issues. While communication has
continued, provider confidence in the program is waning.
Kansas physicians participate in providing care for Medicaid patients because they
believe all Kansans should have access to quality care. They have continued to do so
even with the increased difficulties of participating in KanCare and declining
reimbursement rates that do not cover the cost of their services. Despite the ongoing
623 SW 10th Avenue • Topeka, Kansas 66612 • 785.235.2383 • KMSonline.org

assurances of the Kansas Department of Health and Environment that they are aware of
these issues and working to resolve them and nearly a year after the passage of HB 2026
re-affirmed the legislature’s desire to affectively administer care to vulnerable Kansans,
much of the program’s underlying problems remain.
Considering these factors, the Kansas Medical Society supports increasing legislative
oversight into the administration and extension of KanCare and any substantial changes
to the program from this point forward. We respectfully respect your favorable
consideration of HB 2591. Thank you.

