Alexander M. Germann, University of Kansas School of Medicine, MD Candidate Class of 2020 3/8/17
Written Testimony to the House Committee on Health and Human Services Regarding Senate Bill 32:
Medical student loan agreements for psychiatry.
Representative Hawkins, Representative Concannon, and distinguished members of the House Health
and Human Services committee, I humbly thank you for affording me this opportunity to share my
testimony today in support of this bill. My name is Alex Germann and I am merely a first year medical
student at KUMC, far from being a doctor, with little clinical experience. I am not the most intelligent,
the most informed, nor the most charismatic student – just an average M1 who cares enough to stand
up for others in a noble fight. Although I am insignificant, what I have to say is far from inconsequential,
as many lives may be changed for the better with the desired outcome I seek here today.
I personally am not going into the field of psychiatry, nor into primary care, rather I intend to pursue a
career in surgery. However, this does not mean that I do not understand the importance of primary care
or mental health. Indeed, I believe these areas of medicine are of the utmost importance. This is why my
friend and colleague, Daniel Ortiz, and I founded the Psych Interest Group at KUMC, after we discovered
that there were no campus organizations dedicated to exposing students to a career in psychiatry, nor
was there a group dedicated to informing students of mental health issues and providing/directing
students to mental health resources. For example, this month we will be conducting mental health
screening to KUMC students and providing them with resources for mental health needs in an attempt
to raise mental health awareness and ensure they know where to find help if they need it.
As I am sure that you are all aware, and what Mr. Ortiz has touched on, is that there is an abysmal
shortage of psychiatrists in Kansas, and that all but five counties are federally-designated shortage
areas, my own county of Chautauqua County included. He has also stated some of the statistics
concerning the egregious waiting times and inadequate treatment. I hope that you are also cognizant of
the fact that people suffering from a mental health illness contribute more than twice as much to
healthcare system burden and costs as a mentally healthy patient. I have family members that can attest
to this fact, as well as myself, as our family has a history of mental health issues. Not only would
extending KSML to include psychiatry help those in need of mental health treatment, but it would also
be cost-effective by diminishing the strain to the healthcare system in both cost and office visits, and at
no extra expense as the current KSML stands today. If that is not enough to convince you to pass this
bill, consider the fact that you are ensuring that these psychiatrists are staying in Kansas and practicing
where it is greatly needed, improving both the mental and physical well-being of Kansans.
I come here today to implore you to do the right thing for the people of this great state and pass this bill.
There is nothing to lose from it, and you only have to gain from it. If you pass this bill, so many people
will have access to mental health care who otherwise would not have had it before. You would
indubitably be fulfilling your duties by doing these people a great service. I graciously and humbly thank
you for your time and attention.
Alexander M. Germann
M.D. Candidate, Class of 2020
University of Kansas School of Medicine
Co-President of PsychIG
Medical Student Assembly M1 Class Representative
Student Governing Council, School of Medicine Senator & Chair of Student Services

