7570 W 21st ST N
Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104

Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President
Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

President-Elect
John Feehan, MD, Olathe

Vice President
Jeremy Presley, MD,
Dodge City

Secretary
Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Treasurer
Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres./Board Chair

Testimony: SB32
Kansas Medical Student Loan Program and
Kansas Medical Residency Bridging Program
House Health and Human Services Committee
March 9, 2017
By: Dodie Wellshear, Government Relations Consultant
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to present testimony in support of SB32, on behalf of
the Kansas Academy of Family Physicians (KAFP).
KAFP is an organization representing more than 1,660 active, resident, student and life
members across the state. The mission of KAFP is to promote access to, and
excellence in, health care for all Kansans through education and advocacy for family
physicians and their patients. Quality health care and health outcomes for our patients
guide our public policy work. Family physicians see people of all ages, both men and
women, and work with almost every type of ailment and illness that afflict patients.

Diane Steere, MD, Wichita

AAFP Delegates
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA,
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates
Doug Gruenbacher, MD,
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors
Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP,
Lawrence
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD,
Smith Center
Holly Allen Terrell, MD, Wichita
Danelle Perry, MD, Olathe
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP,
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD,
Kansas City

Foundation President
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP,
Plainville

Executive Vice President
Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

Medical Student Loan Program and Medical Residency Bridging Program Background
The Kansas Medical Student Loan Program (MSLP) was designed years ago to
encourage primary care physicians to practice in underserved counties in Kansas. The
program works by requiring a one-year practice commitment in an under-served
county for every year of participation in the MSLP.
Similarly, the Kansas Medical Residency Bridging Program (MRBP) provides support to
primary care residents, based on their commitment to practice in an underserved
community. The incentives in this program are funded 50% by the state and 50% by
the communities where the resident plans to practice upon graduation.
Currently, the MSLP is funded to allow about 30 students to enter per year. The MRBP
currently has 14 residents participating. Both of these programs have proven to be
successful national models and there is always great demand for these slots.
Senate Action
In its original draft, SB32 was a mirror of HB2124, which was previously heard in this
committee. As you may remember, KAFP opposed that bill because it would have
added psychiatry to the list of specialties eligible for the Kansas Medical Student Loan
Program and the Kansas Medical Residency Bridging Program, without adding
additional loan slots.

The Senate Public Health and Welfare Committee amended the bill to create loan
funds separate from those for primary care – the Psychiatry Medical Loan Repayment
Fund and the Psychiatry Medical and the Rural Health Bridging Psychiatry Fund.
Subject to appropriations, the bill allows the KU School of Medicine to enter into
student loan agreements with six students who commit to practicing in under-served
areas in general or child psychiatry. Similarly, it allows the school to enter into
residency bridging agreements with three medical residents training in general or child
psychiatry.
It is important to note that this bill does not provide funding for the scholarships,
rather it sets up the mechanism – subject to appropriations – for that to occur.
KAFP Position on SB32
Because the bill, as amended, delineates between primary care and psychiatry
scholarship funds and creates additional scholarship slots for psychiatry, KAFP has
withdrawn our opposition to the bill. We are grateful for the opportunity to have
worked together with the Association of Community Mental Health Centers and the
Kansas Psychiatrists Association to develop a bill that meets the interests of all parties
and, more importantly, medically under-served communities across our state.
We thank you, again, for the opportunity to present these comments and urge the
committee’s support of SB32.

