800 SW Jackson St., Suite 1414
Topeka, KS 66612
Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary

Board of Pharmacy

phone: 785-296-4056
fax: 785-296-8420
pharmacy@ks.gov
www.kansas.gov/pharmacy
Sam Brownback, Governor

Testimony concerning SB 51
House Committee on Health and Human Services
Presented by Alexandra Blasi, Executive Secretary
On behalf of
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy
March 8, 2017
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy is pleased to testify as a proponent of SB 51. The amendments
proposed with appropriately expand the Board’s authority to schedule, on an emergency basis,
dangerous drugs any time the legislature is not available to make such changes to the Kansas Uniform
Controlled Substances Act.
Pursuant to K.S.A. 65-4102(e), the Board is required to initiate emergency scheduling proceedings when
two sets of circumstances occur. The first set of circumstances requires an attorney notify the Board of
Pharmacy of initiation of a prosecution with respect to a controlled substance analog. Though the ADA
will cover this matter in greater detail, the difficulty of initiating a prosecution for possession of a
substance that is not yet unlawful is notable. It is only after receiving this notice that the Board of
Pharmacy is able to contemplate temporarily adding a substance to the Kansas drug schedules. For this
reason, SB 51 amends subsection (e) to allow the Board of Pharmacy to initiate emergency scheduling
proceedings upon a finding that the substance presents an imminent hazard to the public safety. Such a
finding shall be based on the Board’s consideration of whether the substance has been federally
scheduled on a temporary basis, the history and current pattern of abuse, the scope, duration, and
significance of abuse, the risk to the public health, and the clandestine importation, manufacture, or
distribution of the substance. This evaluation is already outlined in K.S.A. 65-4102 and remains
unchanged in this bill.
The second set of circumstances required to initiate emergency scheduling proceedings mandates the
substance in question meet the criteria outlined in K.S.A. 21-5701 and K.S.A. 65-4101 under the
definition of a controlled substance analog. Currently, a controlled substance analog means a substance
that is intended for human consumption and:
1. The chemical structure is substantially similar to a controlled substance already scheduled in
Kansas;
2. The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
similar to a controlled substance already scheduled in Kansas; or
3. With respect to a particular individual, the individual represents or intends the substance to have
a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system substantially
similar to a controlled substance already scheduled in Kansas.
The definition’s three listed criteria are only separated by the word “or” between the last two criteria.
Unfortunately, a Kansas appellate court has interpreted the first criterion to be conjunctive, meaning that
multiple criteria must be present to determine that the substance in question is a controlled substance

analog. This is a high bar and one that even the lethal drug U-47700 did not meet last year. Furthermore,
the court’s interpretation is not believed to be the original intent of the statutory language. Therefore, SB
51 amends the statute to allow greater flexibility, such that the substance may meet any of the three
criteria in order to be considered a controlled substance analog.
The controlled substance analog criteria also require that the substance be substantially similar to a
controlled substance already scheduled in Kansas. This presents a challenge for new drugs, drugs that
have emerged after being hidden in a drawer for decades, or drugs that are only substantially similar to
controlled substances recently included in the federal schedules and not yet scheduled in Kansas. The
issue encountered with U-47700 was that it is not substantially similar in chemical structure to any
substance currently controlled in Kansas, though it was substantially similar to a federally scheduled
controlled substance and was, itself, temporarily scheduled in Spring 2016. As a result, criminal charges
could not be filed under K.S.A. 21-5701, and there was no mechanism to invoke the Board of
Pharmacy’s ability to consider emergency scheduling of the substance. To avoid this issue in the future,
SB 51 expands K.S.A. 65-4102(e) to allow the Board of Pharmacy to consider controlled substance
analogs or any new drug for emergency scheduling. New drugs are defined by K.S.A. 65-656 as:
1. Any drug the composition of which is such that such drug is not generally recognized, among
experts qualified by scientific training and experience to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
drugs, as safe and effective for use under the conditions prescribed, recommended, or suggested
in the labeling thereof; or
2. Any drug the composition of which is such that such drug, as a result of investigations to
determine its safety and effectiveness for use under such conditions, has become so recognized,
but which has not, otherwise than in such investigations, been used to a material extent or for a
material time under such conditions.
Last, SB 51 amends the length of scheduling from one year to July 1 of the following calendar year.
This change is made to accommodate the Kansas legislative session and tendency for bills to become
effective upon publication in the statute book on July 1. This does not necessarily extend the timeline; it
could mean as many as 16 months or as little as seven months.
Though these are material changes to the current laws governing emergency scheduling, the Board of
Pharmacy believes they are imperative to protect the public from dangerous and lethal substances that
may emerge at a time that the legislature is not in session and unable to consider permanent scheduling.
This expanded authority still remains narrow in scope, is tailored to a specific purpose, and is not
without checks and balances. Any emergency scheduling is only temporary and would have to be
reviewed by the legislature during the next session.

