Kirk D. Thompson
Director

Derek Schmidt
Attorney General
Testimony in Support of Senate Bill 52
Before the House Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
Katie Whisman, Executive Officer
Kansas Bureau of Investigation
March 8, 2017

Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of Senate Bill 52, which would update the
drug schedules included in the Kansas uniform controlled substances act.
Under both the federal and state uniform controlled substances acts, there are five schedules, or
lists of drugs. Schedule I drugs are those determined to have a high potential for abuse with no
currently accepted medical use while Schedule V drugs are those with a low potential for abuse
and a currently accepted medical use.
Each year, the Kansas Bureau of Investigation works very closely with the Kansas Board of
Pharmacy and a multidisciplinary group of individuals to identify and address emerging drug
threats in Kansas. This year, Senate Bill 52 is the product of that collaboration.
Jurisdictions across the country are experiencing, firsthand, a rapidly emerging and very serious
public safety threat which is commonly being referred to as “the opioid epidemic”. According to
the Centers for Disease Control, Americans are dying at a rate of 78 per day from opioid
overdoses. Kansas is not immune. In recent months, we have become aware of several drug
related overdose deaths attributed to dangerous substances which are not currently controlled in
Kansas. Senate Bill 52 seeks to correct that.
Senate Bill 52 will also help us continue our efforts to address increasing trends in the use of
“Designer Drugs”, or those that are synthesized with the specific intent of circumventing existing
drug laws by slightly altering the molecular structure of a currently controlled substance. These
alterations, although often slight, produce analog substances that are equally potent in their effect
on the human central nervous system.
Additionally, Senate Bill 52 will update the Kansas drug schedules to reflect recent
modifications to the federal drug schedules.
To summarize, Senate Bill 52 will make the following changes to address emerging drug threats
which pose a risk to the health and safety of Kansas citizens:
Page 1 of 2
1620 S.W. Tyler / Topeka, Kansas 66612-1837 / (785) 296-8200 FAX (785) 296-0915

Add dangerous synthetic opioids to Schedule I
AH-7921, Beta-hydroxythiofentanyl, Butyryl fentanyl, Furanyl fentanyl, U-47700 are
each dangerous synthetic opioids that have recently been placed in Schedule I of the
federal drug schedule. These dangerous drugs are being seen in Kansas. They pose
significant risks to illicit drug users, law enforcement officers, and forensic scientists that
come in contact with them.
O-desmethyltramadol is also a synthetic opioid analgesic being marketed and sold as a
“legal opiate substitute” and is readily available on the internet. It is sometimes used in
herbal mixtures like “spice” and is significantly more potent than its parent tramadol.
Etizolam is a short-acting psychoactive drug being marketed and sold as a “research
chemical” and is readily available on the internet. It recently caused an epidemic of
overdoses among teens and college students in the Kansas City metropolitan area and has
been detected in lab submission received by the KBI Forensic Science Laboratory.
Update existing synthetic cannabinoid class in Schedule I
Synthetic cannabinoids, another class of “Designer Drugs”, pose significant risks to the
health and wellbeing of persons who consume them. These chemicals are often sprayed
onto botanical substances and marketed as “potpourri” or “spice”. When smoked, they
cause users to become violently ill or lose consciousness.
In response to the growing trends in use of Designer Drugs and the challenges they
present in scheduling, Kansas has adopted a “class” approach to drug scheduling. This
year, we propose updating some existing synthetic cannabinoid class definitions to
include a fluoro-benzyl substitution.
Other changes to federal schedule
Thiafentanil is being placed in Schedule II and Brivaracetam in Schedule V in
accordance with recent modifications to the federal drug schedule.
Timely passage of Senate Bill 52 is critical. The changes included therein help manage the threat
these abused compounds pose to the health and safety of Kansas citizens.
The Kansas Bureau of Investigation strongly supports these statutory amendments, as well as the
amendment made by the Senate Health and Public Welfare Committee, and respectfully asks the
Committee to recommend Senate Bill 52 favorably for passage.
###

Page 2 of 2
1620 S.W. Tyler / Topeka, Kansas 66612-1837 / (785) 296-8200 FAX (785) 296-0915

