February 7, 2017
House Health and Human Services Committee
Testimony in Support of HB 2031

Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee,
My name is Michele Longabaugh, seven years ago today, at the age of 47, I was
dismissed from a Wichita hospital with the diagnosis of stage 4 anal cancer and a poor
prognosis. I was given three years expected survival with treatment. Being a devoted
wife, mother, nurse and involved in my community I decided to fight the cancer with
everything I had.
After multiple rounds of aggressive treatment, including chemo, radiation, and surgery
both in Wichita and at MD Anderson, including one recurrence, I have been diseasefree since 2014…but not problem free. My body was left weakened and I struggled to
regain strength so I could re-enter the work force and resume a good quality of life once
more. This has been a real struggle for me.
I now live with the fallout of not having organized palliative care integrated early in my
treatment and throughout my miraculous recovery. At one point during my recovery I
was being treated by ten different specialists. My quality of life was lost in the shuffle
and my need for palliative care was minimized by my poor prognosis. I wish that I had
been treated like I was going to survive! I was left with the responsibility for navigating
my own recovery. I felt lost and without a voice. I didn’t know what questions to ask or
even who to ask. As a result, my recovery was impacted. A palliative care program
would have changed that for me. I know that my physical and emotional recovery
would have been accelerated, the burden on my family lessened and some of the
long term side effects minimized.
I am not alone. Thousands of people in Kansas and their families are impacted by
serious illnesses every year. If I as a health care worker struggled to orchestrate my
own recovery, what happens to others not familiar with medical infrastructure at all?
There is a misperception in society that palliative care means hospice care. That’s not
true. Palliative care can apply to any one at any stage of their illness. By treating the
pain, distress and all side effects that come with cancer, we can help families facing
serious illnesses live better during and after treatment.
Palliative care, or I what I like to call comfort care, should be given throughout treatment
and survivorship. Today I live with chronic pain and fatigue, digestive and nutritional
challenges, marked lower body weakness and a chronic lung condition. I live with the

anxiety that comes from wondering if any new pain or symptom is my cancer returning. I
am committed to improving quality of life for others facing cancer. Palliative care
can offer the necessary support to make a distinct difference to all diagnosed and
impacted by any serious illness whether they are expected to survive three
months, three years or three decades.
Leadership and education about palliative care is vital. I am asking you to support the
formation of the Palliative Care and Quality of Life Interdisciplinary Advisory Council to
ensure no future patient feels they are worse off after surviving cancer because they did
not know about or have access to palliative care.
Thank you for considering this important issue.

Michele Longabaugh, RN
Wichita, Kansas

