Testimony in Support of Senate Bill 282
Before the House Standing Committee on Health and Human Services
March 8, 2018
Submitted by:

Tammy Young
Citizen of Basehor, Kansas

Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee,

Thank you for the opportunity to testify in support of Senate Bill 282.
The reason I support this bill is because I have seen what kratom can do to a person. Both of my
sons have been through addiction with this drug.
One of my boys started using this to help him sleep as he was going through a lot of stress and
body pain from starting a new and very physical job. He started out using a small amount, it
didn't take long before he was using more and more. He wasn't acting like himself at all, he was
a kratom junkie. I told him that this was crazy, he was spending a lot of time and money on this
stuff. He decided he would quit, but that didn't happen. He was going through hard withdraws,
shaking, sweating, puking. It was to hard on him he couldn't put it down. He got into trouble and
went to jail, thank God he did because he detoxed. He told me that was the hardest detox he had
ever been through. My son beat meth addiction and pill addiction on his own but couldn't beat
kratom.
My 2nd son has had a long history of drug addiction. His kratom story begins after he got out of
jail. He was on probation and wanted to get high without getting in trouble with his probation
officer. He lived and breathed kratom, his life revolved around it. He found out he was going to
be a dad and quit but it was very hard on him it took him along time to wean off of it but there
was a lot of sickness going on while doing so.
My boys were both using this at the same time. At first they were “kratom buddies” and not long
after they started arguing, thinking one was stealing the others kratom, it was all definitely drug
addict behavior. They were getting it by gallon plastic bags full. They would beg me for money
if they didn't have any kratom cause they were sick and needed to feel better.
A little about me. I have been a using addict ( clean for 15 years), I lost my 1st husband of 20
years of an accidental overdose from xanax. I have been the mom of addicts. I'm telling you this
because I want you to know I know addiction and this kratom is definitely addicting. I hear
people say that it helps people get off opioids, if that's true then that is great but it needs to be
through a Dr, not your local gas station.
Please don't let another family suffer what me and my family went through.
Thank you for your time. I would be happy to stand for questions.

