Date: March 14, 2018
To:

House Committee on Health and Human Services

From: Kevin J. Robertson, CAE
Executive Director
RE:

Support to SB 312 – Dental Therapists under Direct Supervision

Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee I am Kevin Robertson, executive director of
the Kansas Dental Association (KDA) representing the state’s 1,500+ licensed dentists. Thanks
for the opportunity to discuss with you the Kansas Dental Associations’ thoughts on SB 312.
The KDA has always believed that all Kansans deserve access to safe, quality dental care to
meet their diagnostic, restorative, and surgical dental needs. As such, the KDA has strongly
opposed dental therapy legislation that has been proposed over the past eight legislative
sessions including 2017 HB 2139 which we testified in opposition to last year.
The KDA supports SB 312 because it addresses the KDA’s consistent and key public health and
safety concern regarding a non-dentist providing irreversible surgical procedures without a
dentist present. The bill includes nearly all the procedures allowed in past dental therapist bills,
however, it separates the most invasive irreversible surgical procedures by requiring them to be
performed with a dentist present with the dental therapist under direct supervision.
Make no mistake, the members of the KDA are not in full agreement that a dental therapist is
the best answer to address dental access concerns in Kansas. Dental treatment by a fully
trained U.S. dentist remains the gold standard in dental care around the world. Though the
KDA would prefer all dentists support the official position of the association, it is not surprising
after opposing numerous dental therapist bills over the past eight years that some do not. The

KDA Executive Committee and Board of Delegates, however, after significant discussion voted
overwhelmingly to support SB 312. The KDA’s support is based mainly on three important
changes in SB 312.
1. A dentist can supervise no more than three dental therapists;
2. Extractions of primary and permanent teeth have been modified or eliminated, and;
3. Irreversible surgical dental procedures are performed under the direct supervision of a
dentist.
Further, the KDA supports this measure with the understanding and commitment from key
stakeholders to allow this new dental therapist program to work in Kansas until it is operational
and fully evaluated in the 2030 study as called for in bill. The KDA will oppose any expansion of
the scope of SB 312, during its enactment and until it is fully evaluated.
1

There are exciting developments in remote dental outreach. The KDHE Bureau of Oral Health is
currently putting the finishing touches on a pilot teledentistry program which would expand the
use of offsite diagnosis and authorization to enhance and expand the use of both ECP III dental
hygienists and dental therapists working outside a dental office. Teledentistry does NOT take
the place of direct supervision.
SB 312 will increase dental access across Kansas particularly with the state’s Medicaid
population. Use of a dental therapist is permitted by KanCare provider dentists and community
health center dentists and will be allowed to treat any and all patients within their scope of
practice. This will make it possible will result in an increase in the number of KanCare enrollees
who receive dental treatment and may very well increase the number of dentists enrolled in
KanCare by allowing them more practice options and increase the capacity of the office to
provide care.
A dental therapist under SB 312 will also increase care in settings like schools, nursing homes,
etc. where dentists are not present. A dental therapist will be able to fulfill immediate services
like recementing a crown that has fallen off, fabricating a new temporary crown, removing
sutures from a previous dental treatment, do a brush biopsy on a suspicious legion, reimplant a
tooth that has been knocked out, adjust dentures and bridges, dispense and administer some
medications, provide emergency temporary services and more.
As we discuss dental access as it relates to dental therapists, it is also important address Kansas’
dentist workforce. While it’s true that more dentists than ever are retiring from dental practice,
it is also true that dentists are practicing longer…with an average retirement age of 68.8…and
there are more dentists than ever graduating from dental schools around the country and
coming to Kansas to practice dentistry. The number of current first-year dental student around
the country who will be graduating in 2020 exceeds 6,200. That number was 3,880 just 20 years
ago. Its predicted that the number of dentists will continue to grow at least through the year
2035 and the average age will continue to decrease over that time period.
The total number of dentists practicing in Kansas has increased by 8.2% since 2009 while the
population growth of the state of Kansas is 2.1% since 2010. Kansas now has over 1,500
dentists practicing in the state! No, these dentists are not evenly distributed across Kansas,
however, you might be surprised to know that a single dentist in rural Kansas comfortably
services 4,000 – 6,000 patients. This is possible because only around 50% of Kansans who have
access to dental payment through dental insurance seek out a dentist annually.
As you know Kansas does not have a dental school. Kansas’ dental school is the UMKC School of
Dentistry via an agreement between our two states. Though that agreement calls for 85 Kansas
students to be educated (20-22 per class) many Kansans achieve admittance to UMKC as
Missouri residents. Over the past two years an average of 21 Missouri UMKC dental school
students actually graduated from a KANSAS high schools in addition to our “official” 85 Kansas
students. New dental schools have opened and expanded around the region. The new Missouri
School of Dentistry and Oral Health recently opened in Kirksville, MO and graduated its first
2

class in 2017. Utah has also opened a new dental school in the past few years opening more
dental seats at UNMC (Lincoln) and Creighton in Omaha and others like UMKC and UNMC have
increased their class sizes. Kansas dentists have graduated from dentals schools around the
country like University of Oklahoma in Oklahoma City, University of Iowa in Iowa City, UIChicago, etc.
The KDA has always recognized that dental access requires a multi-faceted approach. In 2013
the KDA began a partnership with Delta Dental of Kansas to create the Kansas Initiative for New
Dentist (KIND) dental student scholarship and grant program to create an economic incentive
for dentist to locate in rural areas. Patterned after the successful state Bridging Loan Program
for physicians, the privately funded KIND program has awarded 13 students scholarships with
seven dentist awardees now graduated and fulfilling their commitments to practice in rural
Kansas.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today. I would be happy to answer any
questions at the appropriate time.

3

