John T. Fales, Jr. D.D.S., M.S.
Date: February 1, 2018
To: House Committee on Health and Human Services
From: John T. Fales, Jr., D.D.S., M.S.
RE: Support to SB 312 – Dental Therapist Compromise Bill
Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee, I am John Fales and I am a pediatric dentist with

a practice in Olathe, Kansas. I am currently the Immediate Past President of the Kansas Dental
Association and the President of the Kansas Association of Pediatric Dentists and I am here
representing those organizations and myself. I have practiced dentistry in Kansas since 1982
and have specialized in pediatric dentistry since 1989. I have been an active Medicaid provider
since 1982 and I am here today because I am supporting Senate Bill 312.
I have testified before this committee regarding previous legislation that has been proposed to
create a dental therapist in Kansas. I have been steadfastly opposed to the creation of a dental
therapist. SB 312, for the first time in 8 years is legislation that I believe effectively addresses
many of my major concerns. First and foremost, has been safety.
As a pediatric dentist, I am an advocate for my child and special healthcare need patients. As
such, I believe that previous proposed legislation was not adequately protecting patients.
Previous bills would have allowed many very difficult procedures be performed by individuals
with less than adequate training in settings with no on-site supervision by a Kansas licensed
dentist. This is referred to as “General Supervision.” I could easily envision a situation where a
dental therapist in Sharon Springs, for example, supervised by a dentist in Lansing, treating a
small child with a massive number of decayed teeth and gets into a difficult to restore tooth
where the solution is beyond the abilities of the dental therapist. What then? With no dentist in
the facility, the child is now in a worse situation then when mom brought her to the dental
therapist.
Primary molar teeth, in a four-year-old, that are abscessed and need to be extracted can be
rather difficult to remove with roots that sometimes are wider by 2 times than the crown
portion visible in the mouth. Many times, these teeth need to be removed in a fashion very
similar to a wisdom tooth extraction. Previous dental therapy bills would have allowed a dental
therapist to attempt such extractions. Permanent tooth extractions which can also prove to be
very difficult would also have been allowed.
Previous dental therapy bills would have allowed almost unlimited restorations of primary and
permanent teeth in a “General Supervision” environment. Restorative dental care, surgical
dental care and the diagnosis of oral and dental disease conditions are parts of dental care that
make it a complex science. The training and experience that a licensed dentist brings to the
table in Kansas are invaluable to allowing for safe and effective care to be delivered to our
patients.

SB 312 has found a compromise place where I can find comfort in knowing that patients are in a
safe and well supervised environment. The requirement that allowed irreversible procedures
are performed only under the “Direct Supervision” of a Kansas licensed dentist is key. I would
like to take a few moments to illustrate some of the important facts about procedures that
would be allowed with “Direct Supervision.”
Only primary teeth with a majority of tooth root resorbed will be allowed to be extracted by a
dental therapist. To help understand this qualification, I would like you to think of a small tree
with roots spread out under the ground. Removing the tree from the ground would be near
impossible. If half of the root system or more was rotted away, the tree would be much easier
to remove and cause less damage to it’s surroundings.
Restorations that may be directly fabricated in the mouth would be allowed to be prepared and
placed. The preparation of the tooth is an irreversible procedure and the need for “Direct
Supervision” is necessary. These situations would be diagnosed, and treatment planned, by the
supervising dentist with patient safety in mind so as to prevent the dental therapist from
finding themselves in a situation they are unable to manage.
SB 312 is designed to maximize patient safety while at the same time increasing access to much
needed dental care. Kansas has several problems that lead to access to care limitations. Lack of
dollars to adequately fund Medicaid reimbursements to dental providers is one problem. This
directly leads to a limited number of dentists willingly to see Medicaid covered patients. A
dental therapist would potentially allow a dentist to be more efficient just as currently happens
in dental practices where dental assistants and dental hygienists help the dentist be more
efficient.
This legislation would allow a Medicaid participating dentist to employ and supervise up to
three dental therapists. Previous bills would have allowed an unlimited number of dental
therapists to be supervised by a dentist. I believe this improves safety for the patient because
the dentist will be able to focus more effectively on the care being provided to his patients.
As an example, as I mentioned previously, I am a Medicaid provider. Although my practice is in
Johnson County, let’s think of a scenario where my practice was in Garden City. I would be able
to employ and supervise up to three dental therapists. I envision that I would utilize their skills
in this way. A patient would come to my office as a new patient and I would see the patient as I
do now and perform a thorough clinical exam with necessary radiographs and other necessary
diagnostic information. After developing a treatment plan to repair and restore existing dental
issues, I would decide which procedures one of the dental therapists would be able to perform.
The patient would be appointed for appropriate appointments and upon their return at a future
date, the dental therapist would do the prescribed care permissible under the dental practice
act. I would check the care at the conclusion of the visit prior to the patient being dismissed
from the appointment. Please understand that I would not be checking multiple steps along the
way. I would diagnose and treatment plan as one event. I would check the work as a second
event.

This is exactly how I directly supervise a dental hygienist in my office today. There are no
provisions in this bill that require a dentist to have many interactions with the patient being
cared for by a dental therapist. “Direct Supervision” in this bill has the same definition that it
does in the dental hygiene sections of the current Dental Practice Act.
The KDA KIND scholarship program, which is privately funded, has been successfully locating
dentists in areas of Kansas that are designated need areas for the past several years. Currently,
these dentists are increasing access to dental care in places that previously were underserved.
With the utilization of a dental therapist created by SB 312, even more patients would receive
care in these offices.
Previous dental therapist bills were designed to create two tiers of dental care for the people of
Kansas. Those less fortunate and recipients of Medicaid assistance were the individuals that the
dental therapist would treat. Those with private insurance and financial resources would be
seen by a dentist. SB 312 is not designed that way. The intention is to have trained qualified
dental therapists working under the “Direct Supervision” of a Kansas licensed dentist provide
care for all patients with dental needs that are specified in this bill. There will be no tiers of care
because no one deserves lesser care than another.
I would like to thank Chairman Hawkins and the members of this committee for working with us
to create a solution that will work for Kansas to increase access to care while protecting the
safety of our citizens. While I am not completely happy with the final version of this bill, I
believe that it represents an excellent compromise. With that, I am optimistic that good change
is on the horizon and we can make a meaningful step forward to improve dental care access for
all Kansans.
Thank you for your time and allowing me the opportunity to share my thoughts with you today.
I am happy to answer questions when it is appropriate.

