To: Chairman Hawkins, Members, Health and Human Services Committee
From: Rachel Monger, Vice President of Government Affairs
Date: March 14, 2018
Testimony in Support of Senate Bill 312
Thank you, Chairman and Members of the Committee. I am Rachel Monger, Vice President of
Government Affairs for LeadingAge Kansas, the state association for faith-based and nonprofit
providers of aging services. We have 160 members across Kansas, which include not-for-profit
nursing homes, retirement communities, hospital long-term care units, assisted living, homes
plus, housing, low-income housing, home health agencies, home and community based service
programs, PACE and Meals on Wheels. Our members serve more than 25,000 elders each day.
Access to routine dental care is an essential health issue for elder Kansans. Most people lose
their dental insurance coverage when they retire. Medicare does not cover routine dental care,
and only provides a few limited services deemed “medically necessary.” Medicaid also no
longer covers oral health care for adults, except for “emergency services.” Under KanCare,
MCOs offer a limited number of preventative dental visits a year. Nursing home residents and
elders who are home-bound or disabled often have limited access to dental care. Nursing
homes do not employ dental staff, and transportation and access to a dentist’s office is often a
steep barrier. Nursing home residents in fragile physical health or with advancing stages of
dementia often cannot obtain dental care unless a dentist comes to the nursing home and
provides care. There are few dentists willing or able to go into a nursing home to perform
dental procedures. Dental therapists provide the opportunity for regular and effective dental
treatment for nursing home residents, rather than elders relying on emergency care that may
come too late.
We testified as neutral on this bill in the Senate Public Health and Welfare Committee because
the original version of SB 312 restricted some of the dental procedures that are most needed by
elders to be performed only in a dental office, while a dentist is personally on-site supervising
patient care before and after their dental procedure. This requirement would have guaranteed
that dental therapists would not provide care for elders in much-needed and essential ways.
The Public Health and Welfare Committee members addressed our concerns by amending the
bill to clarify that procedures may be supervised by a dentist outside of a dental office. Upon
amendment, we feel that we can now support SB 312.

Elders in Kansas represent a large part of the population who struggle to access timely and
effective dental care. We respectfully request that the Committee to take those needs into
account while working on SB 312, and to support the Senate amendments made to the bill.

