Testimony concerning SB 312
House Committee on Health and Human Services
March 14, 2018
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee:
The Kansas State Board of Pharmacy respectfully submits this testimony in opposition to SB 312, as
written. Specifically, the Board has identified four concerns about the language in Section 2, subsection
(d)(17), which would permit dental therapists to dispense and administer certain medications. Upon
visiting with proponents of this bill, the Board now believes that it was not the intent to provide such
broad sweeping authority for dental therapists to dispense and administer medications. Therefore, the
Board strongly supports amending the language in this section to ensure proper supervision, regulation,
and oversight necessary to protect the public.
The bill allows dispensing and administration of the listed medications pursuant to a prescription from
any licensed healthcare provider. In effect, this would allow a dental therapist to send patients home
with a prescription for antibiotics for a UTI, ear infection, or more serious infection if the patient had a
prescription from a licensed healthcare provider. Additionally, there is no requirement to verify the
prescription and no limitation on the number of days supply or quantity dispensed. Dental therapists
would not have the requisite education, training or experience to dispense or administer medications to
patients for these other purposes. Moreover, the Board struggles to understand how or why it is not more
appropriate for patients to have these prescriptions filled/dispensed at their local pharmacy.
The Board appreciates the opportunity to engage in a recent dialogue with the bill’s proponents and has
been told that dental therapists receive adequate training and the Dental Board would have authority to
discipline a dental therapist that does not properly dispense, label, or counsel a patient regarding any
medication dispensed. This is vital, as proper medication review, antibiotic stewardship, and
consideration of patient allergies and possible drug interactions is paramount to patient safety.
The Board understands the need to improve access to dental services and oral healthcare in Kansas and
supports that goal. Unfortunately, the current text of Section 2, subsection (d)(17) is too far-reaching and
appears broader than the authority the proponents seek. To ensure adequate protections are in place, the
Board recommends limiting dispensing and administration to only medications prescribed by a licensed
dentist. Furthermore, these privileges should be limited to oral health or dental needs. Such an
amendment would allow dental therapists to practice and provide necessary services to Kansans, and the
Board is hopeful that this would be reasonable and agreeable to the bill’s proponents and the Committee.
Respectfully submitted.

