Testimony on Senate Bill 312
Licensure of Dental Therapists
Presented to
Committee on Health and Human Services
By
Cathleen Taylor-Osborne, DDS, MA
State Dental Director
Kansas Department of Health and Environment
March 14, 2018
Chair Representative Hawkins, Vice Chair Concannon and members of the committee. I am Dr. Cathleen Taylor-Osborne,
State Dental Director, Kansas Department of Health and Environment. Thank you for this opportunity to provide
testimony in support of SB 312 regarding the practice of dental therapy.
This bill affords the ability of a registered dental hygienist a broad scope of practice after graduating from an accredited
program approved for the study of dental therapy and fulfilling licensing requirements. The current discussion
surrounding this bill that has led to this hearing is that there are many irreversible procedures that are listed as
performed under direct supervision of a dentist. This is a change and compromise that has allowed the KDA and the
KDHA to support any draft of legislation regarding dental therapists. This is both significant and remarkable. Dentistry in
KS has evolved and continues to adapt to changing times and demands. This is evident in the expanded practices of the
Extended Care Permit level III dental hygienist. It is evident in that the only regional school of dentistry that accepts
Kansas residents as “in state” is UMKC School of Dentistry’s acceptance of 20-22 per year as opposed to 10 per year
when I attended in the 1990’s. The discussions and future of the use of teledentistry is certainly in the forefront of
changing diagnosis and treatment planning practices. There are many factors driving the initiative to add another level
of licensure in dentistry, not the least of which is the career choices that are being made by graduating dental students
because of huge debt, costs of practice, levels of Medicaid reimbursement to name a few. I was a dental hygienist for 15
years before entering dental school and obtaining my dental degree. There is a steep curve of didactic and clinical
training that must be accomplished to successfully practice as a general dentist and even more so as a specialist. The
path of allowing a dental hygienist to receive additional training and education to practice as a dental therapist under
direct supervision for irreversible treatment is both appropriate and desirable to address the access to care issues as
well as fulfill the responsibilities that our self-regulated profession has to the public health, welfare and safety.
Additionally, KDHE stands ready to conduct the required data collection, analysis and surveillance as stated, from July
2020-2030.
Thank you for your consideration of Senate Bill 312.

