Testimony for Senate Bill 351
Establishing the Pharmacy Patients Fair Practices Act
House Insurance Committee
By Aaron Dunkel, Executive Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association, Topeka Kansas
Chairman Vickrey and Members of the Committee:
I am Aaron Dunkel, Executive Director for the Kansas Pharmacists Association (KPhA). The Kansas
Pharmacists Association is the statewide professional association that represents Kansas pharmacists,
pharmacy technicians and student pharmacists from all practice settings. Thank you for allowing me to
testify on behalf of KPhA in support of Senate Bill 351—Establishing the Pharmacy Patients Fair
Practices Act.
This bill provides protections for patients related to the cost of their medications and protects the right
of the pharmacist to discuss lower cost medication alternatives with their patients. SB 351 is a
compromise bill that has been negotiated between the pharmacists and the Pharmacy Benefit Managers
(PBMs), with the assistance of the Senate Financial Institutions and Insurance Committee and
Chairman Longbine. The bill focuses on eliminating practices, that historically, have been found in
contracts provided to pharmacies by pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs).
There are two common practices we are asking to be restricted in this bill. Nothing in the bill is
intended to limit competition between pharmacies, just to eliminate practices that limit the patient’s
access to information about their medication costs and deter a provider’s ability to have an open
conversation about costs with their patient.
The first practice we are asking to restrict is that of a patient of a commercial insurance plan being
required to pay a copay for their medications that is greater than what the patient would pay for the
medication if they were to simply pay with cash and not use insurance. This allows for transparency at
the point of sale of the relationship of the patient copay to the cash price of the medication. We believe
this is important to ensure that the patient is paying no more than necessary for their medications.
SB 351 would also ensure that pharmacists can discuss lower cost medication alternatives with their
patients. We believe that if there are less expensive options for the patient, that are therapeutically
equivalent, this conversation should be allowed to occur. To address this issue, we are asking for
protection from contracts that disallow pharmacists/patient conversations regarding these available
alternatives. An example of this would be talking about and then substituting an equivalent generic for
a brand name medication. In many contracts PBMs have limited pharmacies in their ability to discuss
costs or treatment alternatives with patients. It is our sincere belief that the ability to discuss
medication options and to provide medication reviews with patients constitutes one of the greatest
benefits of the patient/pharmacist relationship. These kinds of reviews contribute to positive patient
health outcomes, and in the long run reduce health care costs.
Kansas Pharmacists Association
1020 SW Fairlawn Rd. | Topeka, KS | 66604
785-228-2327 | Fax 785-783-4525 | www.ksrx.org

I would like to reiterate in closing that the provisions of SB 351 are a compromise reached between
pharmacists and the PBM’s representatives. The bill is intended to ensure that patients are allowed
access to information about their medication costs and medication alternatives, while also allowing
their provider to have open and frank conversations with them about the cost impact of those
alternatives available to them. Thank you for your time and consideration today, I would be happy to
stand for questions at the appropriate time.
Sincerely,

Aaron Dunkel
Executive Director
Kansas Pharmacists Association

Kansas Pharmacists Association
1020 SW Fairlawn Rd. | Topeka, KS | 66604
785-228-2327 | Fax 785-783-4525 | www.ksrx.org

