Support Senate Bill 351
House Insurance Committee
March 6, 2018
Submitted by Larrie Ann Brown, KS Legislative Counsel

Chairman Vickrey and members of the committee, thank you for the opportunity to submit testimony in
support of Senate Bill 351.
Express Scripts is one of the nation’s largest pharmacy benefits managers, managing the prescription drug
benefit for 80 million Americans. We improve health outcomes by making the use of prescription drugs safer
and more affordable. Express Scripts administers pharmacy benefits for Kansas employers, health plans, labor
unions, Medicare beneficiaries, and TRICARE, the health plan for active-duty military, retired military and their
dependents.
We support the patient-protection provisions of SB 351 that ensure that patients pay the lowest possible price
for their medications, as well as allowing a pharmacist to communicate with patients about alternative drug
options.
At Express Scripts, we believe our members absolutely must have full line of sight as to what a drug will cost
them, and should know if there are opportunities to decrease that cost. We also believe patients should
always pay the lowest price possible, whether that is their plan’s copayment, or their pharmacy’s cost for the
medication, whether that is called a Usual and Customary (U&C) cost or a cash price.
Employers know lower copayments help their members stay on track with their prescription therapy, and do
all they can to help keep these copays as low as possible. However, there are instances, particularly with lowcost generics, where a pharmacy’s price for a medication is less than a patient’s established copay.
In any instance when the price for a medication at a particular pharmacy is less than the copay associated with
that formulary tier, our members pay the lower price and their drug utilization is captured in our claims
system, which allows members and pharmacists to benefit from our real-time clinical safety reviews of a
patient’s medications.
We are pleased to support SB 351.

