STATE OF KANSAS
KANSAS BOARD OF COSMETOLOGY
714 SW JACKSON STREET, SUITE 100
TOPEKA, KS 66603

PHONE: (785) 296-3155
FAX: (785) 296-3002
kboc@ks.gov
www.kansas.gov/kboc

GOVERNOR JEFF COLYER, M.D.
SARAH SHIPMAN, SECRETARY
To:

The Honorable Dan Hawkins, Chair
House Health and Human Services Committee

From:

Kansas Board of Cosmetology (KBOC)

Date:

March 7, 2018

Re:

Testimony as proponent for SB 398

To the Chair and Committee Members:
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you regarding SB 398, lowering the requirements for the
senior status license and making life a little easier on the senior citizens in Kansas who also happen to be
KBOC licensees.
The board fully supports this bill in that it does provide a reduction in the cost of living for licensees
who retire after age 60 and who have practiced as licensees in Kansas for a minimum of ten (10) years.
The availability of this license class since it became effective has provided benefit for 282 persons in the
years between 2014-2017. Of that number 28 licensees had simply let their license expire and brought
no revenue into the program. Although the license in a one-time cost for retirees, the license class
provided a small revenue stream for the agency but added value to the life of those senior citizens.
This bill, if passed, will provide an opportunity for licensees who have moved into Kansas from other
states and who practice in Kansas for at least 10 years to benefit from the senior license status. It will
also provide that benefit to licensees who choose to retire from age 60 rather than age 70.
Despite the minimal projected loss in revenue from those choosing the lifetime status, KBOC can
continue its efforts to give back to the licensing population without lowering license fees (i.e.,
previously ceased charging for law books; began absorbing credit card fees to encourage online
renewals).
The board of cosmetology is willing to absorb this minimal loss to provide benefit for long-term
licensees in Kansas.

Respectfully submitted,
Chiquita Coggs

