February 12, 2017
Robert Moser, M.D.
Kansas Care Collaborative
University of Kansas Health System
HB 2674
House Health and Human Services Committee
Good Afternoon Chairman Hawkins, Vice-Chair Concannon and to all the members of the
House Health and Human Services Committee.
My name is Dr. Bob Moser and I am here to speak in favor of HB 2674, a bill to establish the
Kansas telemedicine act. As a Family Physician, Kansas Public Health Association Board of
.Director, and now as the Executive Director of the Care Collaborative, I believe care delivery
models through telemedicine and telehealth can help improve access to healthcare services.
Telemedicine can expand local capability and capacity as there are many uses cases out there
already demonstrating this.
Our Care Collaborative began as the Kansas Heart and Stroke Collaborative, which I shared with
many of you previously at the Special Committee on Health back in October. We are using
telemedicine to provide support in critical access hospitals emergency rooms through a
subscription service with Avera and it has reduced transfers and improved care at the local level.
We are also using home telemonitoring and connecting patients with chronic conditions to health
coaches through A/V communications.
I appreciate the work of the various groups who have been working on this issue and this bill is
the result of their work over the last year. I believe this is a good start to defining and developing
telemedicine as another care delivery model in Kansas.
While I support this bill, and see it as a beginning, I do have a couple of concerns I would like to
share with this committee. As a rural health advocate, I am concerned about the impact certain
uses of telemedicine may have on rural health quality and sustainability. If telemedicine
circumvents or does not promote the usual patient-provider relationships and continuity of care,
then overall costs could increase due to fragmented, uncoordinated and highly variable care
practices. I feel this bill addresses some of this by requiring the exchange of care information
back to the usual provider of care with the patient's consent, and expecting the same standard of
care as a face-to-face visit.
The second concern I have would be services offered within rural communities where the
practice might lead rural health systems to lose revenue. Rural health systems often operate on

