KANSAS
KA
ANSAS
ANSAS
MED
DICAL
MEDICAL
KANSAS
SOC
CIETY
SOCIETY
Esstablished 1859
MEDICAL
SOCIETY
To:

House Health and Human Services Committee

From:

Rachelle Colombo
Director of Government Affairs, Kansas Medical Society

Date:

February 12, 2018

Re:

HB 2674; the Kansas Telemedicine Act

The Kansas Medical Society appreciates the opportunity to appear before you today in
support of HB 2674, the Kansas Telemedicine Act. Telemedicine is a tool that can and
should enhance the patient-physician relationship and has the potential to improve
access. Currently, telemedicine is unregulated in Kansas and while patients and
providers alike utilize telemedicine, the practice has not been consistently encouraged or
enforced.
HB 2674 is the collaborative product of various stakeholders’ agreed upon tenants to
form a fair statutory framework to encourage and regulate telemedicine. The bill does
not speak to all facets of telemedicine - it does not define specific modalities or
platforms, identify all provider types or mandate reimbursement rates. Rather, HB 2674
aims to provide a clear definition of telemedicine as a method for health care delivery via
a technological platform, it ensures that the same standard of care must be met through
telemedicine as in-person care, and it prohibits the denial of reimbursement solely due to
the use of telemedicine versus in-person care.
It is important to note HB 2674 does not increase covered services, but explicitly
recognizes telemedicine as a way to deliver existing covered services. It should not be
misidentified as an insurance mandate. Thirty-one states have established coverage
parity for telemedicine.
Though it is possible that many health care services can be administered through
telemedicine, HB 2674 only outlines the criteria relevant for the practice of medicine and
the delivery of mental health services. Providers must be licensed and regulated by their
respective boards and are held to the same standard of care as otherwise applicable for inperson care.
HB 2674 establishes that telemedicine should be delivered through HIPAA-compliant,
real-time, two-way, interactive audio, visual or audio-visual communication including
secure video conferencing or store-and-forward technology. These qualifiers were
agreed upon by physicians, hospitals, insurers and vendors to ensure patient protection
and high quality care without being overly proscriptive about modalities that may evolve
over time.
623 SW 10th Avenue • Topeka, Kansas 66612 • 785.235.2383 • KMSonline.org

The bill stipulates that a provider utilizing telemedicine will be held to the same standard
of care, including establishing a valid patient-physician relationship and ensuring
continuity of care be requiring that if a patient consents, their primary care physician
must be notified with 72 hours of a telemedicine encounter. While this requirement is
unique to telemedicine, it balances the access that telemedicine affords with the
importance of continuity of care - both of which are in the patient’s best interest and are
best practice.
Finally, HB 2674 provides coverage parity for telemedicine by establishing that an
otherwise covered health care service cannot be denied for reimbursement solely on the
basis of having been delivered via telemedicine or based on the lack of a commercial,
physical, office. This provision extends to those providers who work under the
delegatory authority or direct supervision of a physician, such as an advanced practice
registered nurse or a physician assistant. Additionally, the bill makes clear that the
patient’s medical record serves as documentation for reimbursement so as to remove any
artificial barriers to telemedicine reimbursement that would not otherwise exist for inperson care.
In summary, HB 2674 clearly establishes the criteria for the delivery of health care
services via telemedicine. It delineates those authorized for coverage parity under the act
and clearly stipulates the promulgation of rules and regulation around the practice of
telemedicine as it advances and increases in utilization.
HB 2674 consistently applies licensure, scope of practice, and standard of care
requirements for physicians utilizing telemedicine. It carefully balances the importance
of encouraging access to care with the necessity of protecting the standard of care and
ensuring patient protection.
While the bill does not speak to all facets, eventualities or opportunities relevant to
telemedicine, it does provide a framework that is consistent with laws governing the
practice of medicine and reimbursement for such services. The bill balances the
advantages of increasing utilization of telemedicine with the importance of maintaining
access to in-person care throughout the state.
The Kansas Medical Society supports enacting HB 2674 as a basis for the regulation of
telemedicine in Kansas and respectfully requests your favorable consideration. Thank
you.

