Written Testimony presented by Kansas Speech-Language-Hearing Association to the House Committee
on Health and Human Services
February 12, 2018
Dear Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee,
The Kansas Speech-Language-Hearing Association, KSHA, is neutral on HB 2674, regarding the practice
of telemedicine.
KSHA is a professional membership organization made up of about 1000 speech-language pathologists
and audiologists. We appreciate this opportunity to offer testimony regarding HB 2674, aimed at
reimbursing providers for telehealth services.
While HB 2674 is a step in the right direction for the future of the provision of health care, we urge the
Committee to add Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists to the definition of “Healthcare
Provider.”
Speech-language pathology services provided by our members in the schools are affected by shortages
of qualified, licensed professionals. As a result, and with the advancement of technology for
telepractice, schools have implemented alternative methods of service delivery. These innovative
services are effective, but unfortunately have been impeded by the lack of reimbursement for Medicaideligible students. The benefits of telepractice are well-documented, including providing services in
remote underserved areas and access to services for clients who are unable to leave their homes.
Rationale for Including Speech-Language Pathologists & Audiologists in HB 2674
Passage of such bill would support best practices in service delivery to children in the state of Kansas as
follows:
1) Quality Student Services. There is no question that the service delivery methods of telepractice
within school settings are equal to in-person services. This model has been employed for a
variety of professions and diagnostic groups. Service delivery for students receiving special
education services Kansas, i.e., those who receive services via IDEA or about 13% of all enrolled
students, is jeopardized when shortages and reimbursement limitations create a barrier.
Services are best supported when qualified professionals can use a variety of methods at their
disposal. When school districts do not have the financial resources to provide services in the
absence of available in-person speech-language pathologists, those children may go without
services.
2) Positive Student Learning Outcomes for Telepractice Service Delivery. Recently published
outcomes from the use of Medicaid-reimbursed telepractice showed considerable support and
favorable results (Short, Houston, Scott, & Forducey, 2016). From a sample of 578 children
enrolled in PreK through grade 12 in Oklahoma, the progress demonstrated by those students

148 S. Bay Country Ct.

Wichita, KS 67235

P: 316-202-2288

ksha@ksha.org

www.ksha.org

receiving services via telepractice was equal to or greater than findings from the National
Outcomes Measurement System’s data for traditional service delivery methods. These services,
when reimbursed via Medicaid, are a viable option when in-person services are not feasible.
Briefly, I would like to point out that passing this bill does NOT…
a. Increase the cost of services for Medicaid reimbursement– in fact, cost will be comparable
to in-person service delivery.
b. Reduce the qualification of service providers. As stated in the bill, licensure and certification
requirements will continue to be in place as they are for in-person service delivery.
In summary, it is in the best interest of children receiving special education services to add SpeechLanguage Pathologists and Audiologists to the “healthcare provider” definition in HB 2674. Providing
reimbursement for telepractice would allow SLPs and Audiologists to serve students in rural areas with
shortages of qualified professionals, as well as clients who cannot leave their homes. Thank you for the
opportunity to present testimony.

Sincerely,

Susie Ternes
Executive Director
Kansas Speech Language Hearing Association
ksha@ksha.com

References cited:
Short, L., Rea, T., Houston, B., Scott, S., & Forducey, P. (2016). Positive outcomes for speech telepractice as
evidence for reimbursement policy change. Perspectives of the ASHA Special Interest Groups, Vol. 1 (SIG
18), 3-11.

148 S. Bay Country Ct.

Wichita, KS 67235

P: 316-202-2288

ksha@ksha.org

www.ksha.org

