Testimony in Support of HB2044
Presented to the House Health and Human Services Committee
January 26, 2017
Chairman Hawkins, member of the committee, I am Barbara Andres and I live in Newton
Kansas. I am the Executive Director of Episcopal Social Service, a faith based organization
located in Wichita KS that sponsors a Clubhouse Model program called Breakthrough Club.
I have been active in a variety of local, state, national, and international task forces including the
Kansas State Mental Health Coalition and the Advisory Board of the International Center of
Clubhouse Development. I combine 30 years of nonprofit leadership experience with a Masters
in Social Work and a PhD in Human Services: Nonprofit Management.
Today I want to talk with you about HB 2044:
Allowing Certified Clubhouses in Kansas to receive reimbursement from Medicaid, for
Clubhouse Rehabilitation Services:
A Clubhouse is organized to support people living with mental illness. During the course of their
participation in a Clubhouse, member/participants gain access to opportunities to rejoin the
worlds of friendships, family, employment and education, and to the services and support they
may individually need to continue their recovery. A Clubhouse provides a restorative
environment for people whose lives have been severely disrupted because of their mental illness,
and who need the support of others who are in recovery and who believe that mental illness is
treatable.
The Clubhouse Model falls under the domain of psychosocial and/or psychiatric rehabilitation.
The goals and objectives of psychosocial/psychiatric rehabilitation are to support emotional,
social, and intellectual skills necessary to live, learn, and work independently in the community.
Outcomes beyond the clinical condition are more relevant, such as social role functioning (e.g.,
meaningful roles in society; social inclusion), establishing relationships, work, recreation, and
improved quality of life. These are noteworthy experiences that also denote the recovery process
from severe and persistent mental illness.
Clubhouse programs are appropriate for adults with a serious mental illness who wish to participate
in a structured program with staff and peers and have identified psychosocial rehabilitative goals
that can be achieved in a supportive and structured environment. Participants must have a significant
impairment in their day to day personal, social and/or vocational functioning.
Clubhouse Rehabilitation Services include skill building and mental health management.
Skill Building
•

•

Promote independent living skills aimed at addressing a person’s skill enhancement in areas
such as learning how to access public transportation, how to budget, requesting workplace
accommodations, and ability to follow a schedule, establish and maintain a positive daily routine
Management of mental health and other psychosocial rehabilitative skills in a milieu/setting
replicating real work place, to develop life skills and social skills

1

Testimony in Support of HB2044
Presented to the House Health and Human Services Committee
January 26, 2017
•

Assist with interpersonal development aimed at social appropriateness and social integration, and
the ability to manage their mental illness in situations such as dealing effectively with stressors,
positive assertive skills, and conflict resolution;

Mental Health Management
•
•
•
•

Promote healthy lifestyles that reduce psychiatric symptoms;
Provide psycho-educational information to the member about the importance of taking
medications as prescribed to support recovery and encourage problem solving strategies;
Help the member gain an understanding of the importance of following up with psychiatric care;
Increase/improve knowledge and skills needed to independently manage co-morbid mental
health and substance abuse issues to maintain sobriety and prevent relapse.

The Clubhouse model services works to provide quality services that promotes recovery.
Members have access to services 40+ hours a week and can walk in without an
appointment. Trained staff provides mental health support and rehabilitation
opportunities to all members. Peer support is an important part of the Clubhouse culture and
members are taught to provide healthy suggestions to peers who are experiencing difficult
mental illness symptoms.
Clubhouse Services demonstrate cost saving and life enhancing outcomes that include:
•
•
•
•

Reduced Hospitalization
Reduced incarcerations in local jails
Increased levels pre-vocational activity
Increase in employment for Clubhouse members.

To provide Clubhouse Services a Clubhouse providers must acquire and maintain Clubhouse
Accreditation. This accreditation is a mark of quality, and a clear demonstration of a
Clubhouse’s commitment to excellence. Breakthrough Club is the only certified Clubhouse
in the State of Kansas. The Accreditation process is both evaluative and consultative. It is
conducted by members of the Clubhouse International Faculty (made up of veteran members
and staff from Accredited Clubhouses from around the world).Clubhouse International manages
the accreditation process and attests that accreditation is a mark of quality, and a clear
demonstration of a Clubhouse’s commitment to excellence. The ability to evaluate quality
outcomes in Clubhouse programs has resulted in the Clubhouse model being designated as
evidence based practice by SAMSHA in late 2010.
In conclusion, two Medicaid Codes, H2030 Mental Health Clubhouse Services, billed per 15
minutes or H2031 Mental Health Clubhouse Services, billed by per diem (daily rate) are
available.
Several States have adopted Clubhouse Medicaid Codes and utilize these services as part of their
Medicaid Mental Health Services (Michigan, Maine, and Florida). We are asking that HB 2044
would be passed, funded, and implement during this legislative session.
2

