January 27, 2017

Kansas Association of Nurse Anesthetists
% Paul Hertel CRNA, DNP
825 S. Kansas Avenue, Suite 500
Topeka, Kansas 66612
Dear Paul,
I am writing in regards to the recently introduced Anesthesiologist Assistant (AA) Licensure Act,
HB 2046. I would like to share my personal experience working with AAs in Missouri and the
likely ramifications passage of this bill would have on Nurse Anesthetists (CRNAs) serving
Kansas.
Political turmoil and displacement of CRNAs
The work environment I experienced with Anesthesiologists and CRNAs went from one
built on respect and comradery to an environment full of politics and dissatisfaction when
AAs became part of the department. As a result, we lost large numbers of experienced
CRNAs and maintaining adequate staffing due to the high turnover rate was problematic.
'Mly the politics? The CRNAIAA environment would be similar to working with a rival.
The lack of prior professional/healthcare related work experience was apparent in the
AAs hired in comparison to CRNAs. The multiple years of critical care experience
required to become a CRNA is a source of pride and tradition. The knowledge and
experience CRNAs gain providing hands-on bedside care of critically ill patients cannot
be matched by the AA.
Bringing such turmoil to the few areas that AAs could actually practice in Kansas will
lead to displacement of CRNAs to other states. Kansas citizens deserve the quality care
provided by CRNAs.
Decreased CRNA training access
As CRNAs became replaced with AAs, the number of educational opportunities for
CRNA students decreased. For every AA, there is one less CRNA getting an opportunity
to educate a CRNA student.
CRNA students are the future of anesthesia care in Kansas. Licensing AAs that would
not be able to practice in 70% of the hospitals serviced by CRNAs would not benefit
Kansas. Inadequate CRNA training opportunities, as a result of AA licensure, would
eventually leave many Kansans without adequate access to anesthesia care provided by
CRNAs.
Increased anesthesia care costs
After employment of AAs, the anesthesia department staffing ratios changed from the

normal 1 anesthesiologist collaborating with 4 CRNAs down to typically 2 when AAs
became part of the CRNA/AA model. Acquiring more anesthesiologist to take on AAs,
why? Unfortunately, this comes with increased costs and certainly does not improve
anesthesia safety.
In a financially strained healthcare system, increasing the costs of provision of
anesthesia services is not the answer. In Kansas, CRNAs have a proven track record of
safe cost effective care. Passage of AA licensure would increase costs without any
benefit to patient safety.
Speaking from personal experience, passing AA legislation in Kansas would bring turmoil,
decrease CRNA training access and increase costs without benefit to patient safety or Kansas
residents. We know AAs do not meet the needs of Kansas. They lack the flexibility to provide
anesthesia care in independent practice settings in 70% of the hospitals serviced by CRNAs.
The AA Licensure Act would compromise the long history of quality anesthesia care provided by
CRNAs in Kansas.
I hope you will find this information useful in your efforts to oppose the AA licensure bill. Thank
you for your tireless work for CRNAs.· Kansas and your opposition to the AA bill.
Best regards,

Jason A Bolyard CRNA
4801 W. 81st St.
Prairie Village, Kansas 66208

