January 29, 2017
The Honorable Daniel Hawkins, Chair
Committee on Health and Human Services
Kansas House of Representatives
300 SW 10th
Topeka, KS 66612
Dear Representative Hawkins and members of the Kansas House Health and Human Services
Committee,
I am writing in support for HB 2046, Anesthesiologist Assistant Licensure Act. I am a
practicing Certified Anesthesiologist Assistant (CAA) with family ties to the great state of
Kansas that go back generations. I am the Secretary of the American Academy of
Anesthesiologist Assistants (AAAA) and Chief Anesthetist at Saint Luke’s Hospital on the
Plaza. I am providing written testimony to show what my personal and professional path
has been to becoming a CAA with a desire to return to Kansas. On behalf of the AAAA and
CAAs across the country, show a contingent of CAAs that share a desire to return home to
Kansas to work. I will conclude by providing first hand account on the integration of CAAs
into those hospitals and anesthesia groups that practice under the Anesthesia Care Team
model and reaffirm how HB 2046 will have no negative effects on access to anesthesia
services across rural Kanas.

I was born in San Diego, California to a mom from Prairie Village and a dad from Merriam
that was serving in the Navy during Vietnam. I graduated high school from Shawnee
Mission North in 1989 and went on to spend four years of active duty service with the US
Navy. After the conclusion of the Gulf War and 4 years of service, I returned home to Kansas
to attend Emporia State University, as a nursing major. Because of a scheduling issue I was
placed in Chemistry 1 and not Intro to Chemistry for Nursing. After excelling in the more
advanced class my professor recommend that I consider medical school and continue with
the more rigorous pre med curriculum. During my time at ESU a young nursing student
from Grant County Kansas caught my attention and I spent by summers with her in
southwest Kansas as a farm hand in Stanton County. I was not accepted into the KU school
of Medicine on my first attempt so I entered graduate school at ESU and began work on my
Masters in Biology. During the first of program, my now mother in law, was diagnosed with
a brain tumor at the age of 46. My wife and I felt a calling to return to her home to be with
family. Jobs for biologist in rural Kansas are not very plentiful, so I initially worked for Grant
County Bank managing $30 million in farmland assists within the trust department. I was
eventfully able to put my degree to work as an Environmental Technician for the Kansas
Department of Health and Environment helping to protect the states water resources. After
the battle with cancer was bravely fought and lost, my wife supported my return to school.
At 28 I felt a little old to enter medical school but with my premed undergraduate course
work I did meet all the requirements for the Anesthesiologist Assistant Program at Case
Western Reserve University, which, in 2016 US News and World Report was ranked
number 37 among all national universities. Upon graduation I took the closest job I could to
family, which was Gundersen Lutheran Medical Center in La Crosse, WI. In 2003 Missouri
signed legislation for licensure of CAAs and in 2005 we relocated to be closer to family
This is my story but it is not the only CAA story to be told. As Secretary for the AAAA I have
spoken with many CAAs across the country with ties to Kansas that would like to have the

opportunity to return home to live and work. The closest these individuals can get to
returning home is to accept jobs in near-by states that have already recognized the benefits
of having CAAs involved in their healthcare systems, states like Missouri, Colorado,
Oklahoma, Texas, Wisconsin and New Mexico. Just since Wednesday, over a dozen
individuals expressing hope at returning home to Kansas to work have contacted me.
Hannah Chadick is a first year student with immediate and extended family in Lawrence,
Overland Park and Wichita. Heather Ruck expressed her frustrations to me because she just
graduated from UMKC and is leaving Kansas, moving to Missouri so she can be closer to her
new job. Passage of HB 2046, is an opportunity to allow Kansans to return home and make
a positive impact on the Anesthesia Care Team across the state.

Integration of anesthesiologist assistants into the Anesthesia Care Team within individual
groups or states seems to be an unnecessary anxiety causing experience for nurse
anesthetist. Most of the opposition comes from those that have no or limited exposure
working directly with CAAs. The negative rhetoric is unfortunately propagated without
direct association.

According to the KANA website 83% or 110 of the 132 hospitals in Kansas are staffed solely
by CRNAs. At those 110 facilities that do not provide care under the anesthesia care team
model; this legislation will have no effect on the employment of independently practicing
nurse anesthetist. The remaining healthcare centers that work under the anesthesia care
team model understand that physician anesthesiologist lead the ACT and that all members
work together to provide the optimal anesthesia experience for patients. Members of the
team include both physicians and nonphysicians (anesthesiologist assistant, nurse
anesthetist). Where both providers are employed, job description, abilities, case
assignments, pay, benefits are identical between CAAs and CRNAs; just as they are for
Physician Assistants and Nurse Practitioner working in the same department. When we
conduct interviews a member of our leadership often makes the comparison of a military
trained pilot to a civilian trained pilot; both highly skilled individuals that reached the same
point via different paths. When you board a plane you don’t ask their background, you
know that they are qualified and can rest assured they will do their best to get you there
safely. At Saint Luke’s when we conduct interviews we are looking for those individuals
that will fit the best within our care team. In effect this larger, mixed applicant pool gives us
the ability to hire the BEST provider for our team, regardless of training background. This
translates into our group providing the best care possible to our patients; the same best
care that we all want to see provided in Kansas.
In closing I would like to submit my support for HB 2046, Anesthesiologist Assistant
Licensure Act, and allow Kansans to return home and provide safe, quality anesthesia
services within the Anesthesia Care Team.
Sincerely,
Ty A Townsend, CAA
Secretary, American Academy of Anesthesiologist Assistants
Kansan

