Testimony re: HB2046
House Health and Human Services Committee
Presented by Sharon Niemann DNAP, CRNA on behalf of Kansas Association of Nurse Anesthetists
January 30, 2017

Mister Chairman, Members of the Committee:
My name is Sharon Niemann and I am the Program Director of the Newman University Nurse Anesthesia
Program in Wichita, KS and a member of the KANA (Kansas Association of Nurse Anesthetists). Newman
University is one of only two programs for in nurse anesthesia in Kansas. I am offering written
testimony in opposition to HB 20146 authorizing the licensure of AA (Anesthesia Assistants) in Kansas.
My opposition to AA licensure in Kansas is two-fold. As an the Program Director at NU, I have been
involved in the education and training of more than 240 CRNAs (Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists)
in Kansas with over 170 staying in KS as CRNAs. CRNAs practice throughout KS, providing anesthesia
service in 80% of KS counties as the only anesthesia providers. The licensure and practice of AAs in
Kansas would have devastating implication to nurse anesthesia education in Kansas. SRNAs (Student
Registered Nurse Anesthetists) are trained and educated by both CRNAs and anesthesiologist. SRNAs
may not receive training from AAs, making any cases done by AAs not available for SRNA training. The
accrediting body for CRNA education, the Council on Accreditation for Nurse Anesthesia Education,
require specific types and numbers of clinical cases to meet the standards for completion of a CRNAs
education (similar to the requirements by the UGME for resident anesthesiologists). As AAs can only
practice under the direct supervision of an anesthesiologists, they would be found in the mostly urban
areas of the state, which would have very negative impact on the education of nurse anesthetists,
particularly in those mandatory specialty cases (obstetrics, neuro, pediatrics, cardiovascular, etc.). With
training opportunities for SRNAs dramatically reduced, the number of CRNAs in KS could be markedly
decreased. This would have impact on both urban areas (where the number of CRNAs is double that of
anesthesiologists) but even more importantly, in those 80% of Kansas counties who rely solely on CRNAs
for anesthesia and obstetrical services.
Thank you for allowing me to submit this written testimony.
Sharon Niemann DNAP, CRNA
Program Director
Newman University Nurse Anesthesia Program
niemanns@newmanu.edu

