Testimony re: HB 2046
House Health and Human Services Committee
Presented by Trent Blackwill
on behalf of
Kansas Association of Nurse Anesthetists
Date: 1/27/17

Mr. Chairmen and members of the committee,
My name is Trent Blackwill, I am a 3rd year SRNA student at the University of Kansas
Medical Center. I am speaking on behalf of the Nurse Anesthesia students that may be affected
by this legislation. I firmly oppose HB 2046.
Growing up on a farm in rural western Kansas, I was exposed to difficulties with access
to health care in the rural areas. Fortunately, our county hospital served and to this day still
serves numerous counties in the area with exceptional health care including a full time CRNA.
At a young age, I knew I wanted to give back to these rural communities in desperate need of
anesthesia providers. Being a predominately rural state and the fact that over 80% of hospitals
with surgical services rely solely on CRNA’s for anesthesia care, I chose to pursue a career in
this profession.
I graduated from nursing school at the University of Kansas and fulfilled my minimum
two years of ICU experience at the University of Kansas Hospital. While working nights full
time in the ICU, I continued to take classes focusing on Anatomy, Physiology, Pathophysiology,
Biochemistry, and Organic Chemistry in preparation for applying to Nurse Anesthesia school. I
still remember being overcome with excitement opening that acceptance letter.
Three short years later, hundreds of thousands of dollars in debt, I am preparing to
graduate with a doctoral degree and take that next step in my career. I believe my clinical
training has been exceptional and am confident in my abilities. Nearly eighteen months of my
clinical training was spent primarily at the University of Kansas Hospital. The other twelve
months of clinical were scattered in Kansas, Oklahoma, Nebraska, and Missouri.
This last month has been spent at Children’s Mercy on Hospital Hill. My expectations
for this rotation were very high. However, this last month has been a disappointment in all
aspects of my educational experience. We share this rotation with one SRNA student from
Truman. Each morning we meet to choose which CRNA we would be with for the day.
Unfortunately, most of the time there has only been two CRNA’s there. This leaves us with little
to no choice on which cases we would like to experience. On several occasions, only one CRNA
is available and that means alternating cases with the other SRNA. Multiple times, I have been
called to stay home from clinical because no CRNA’s would be available that day. Over the
length of the rotation, this results in a severely diminished case load. Fortunately, I could attain
my pediatric numbers while at the University of Kansas Hospital. If I had to rely on my
pediatric rotation at Children’s Mercy, I would be very short of that number.

To graduate, we are expected to meet the minimum total number of cases as well as a
minimum number of cases in a variety of areas including but not limited to pediatrics, obstetrics,
intracranial, hearts, lungs, nerve blocks, central lines, and fiber optic intubations. Obstetrics is an
example of one of the types of cases that we get absolutely zero numbers at our primary clinical
site. I spent a month in Tahlequah, Oklahoma doing nothing but Obstetrics and women’s health.
My concern if this legislation is passed is the detriment to clinical experience of future
SRNA students, the livelihood of the program, and the future of anesthesia services in rural
Kansas. By bringing AA’s to Kansas, you are helping the less than 20% of hospitals able to
utilize AA’s. On the other hand, you will undoubtedly undercut the education and clinical
experience of future Nurse Anesthetists. The hospitals utilizing AA’s will be the same hospitals
that the clear majority of our clinical experience comes from. We currently spend months away
from our families and friends to fulfil our clinical requirements because we are competing with
residents for our numbers. Adding in another provider to the mix is going cause even more
strain. Inevitably, if this happens, the nurse anesthesia program is going to have to add
additional clinical sites. Distant clinical sites can and will be a deciding factor for many students
comparing programs.
In a few short months, I will be working as a CRNA. Working a few weeks in a large
urban hospital while traveling to the smaller rural Kansas communities for the other week a
month is an ideal situation. I have verbally committed to a contract that this is possible but have
yet to sign because of this abrupt pop up in legislation.
Thank you for allowing me to testify and I would be happy to yield to questions.

