School of Medicine

January 27, 2017
The Honorable Daniel Hawkins, Chair
Committee on Health and Human Services
Kansas House of Representatives
300 SW 10th
Topeka, KS 66612
Dear Representative Hawkins and members of the Kansas House Health and Human Services Committee,
I am writing in support for HB 2046, Anesthesiologist Assistant Licensure Act. I am the Assistant Dean for Graduate
Studies at the University of Missouri-Kansas City School of Medicine. In this role, I have an understanding of the
Anesthesiologist Assistant profession and the rigorous steps that Anesthesiologist Assistant’s must accomplish in order to
become a licensed health professional. I am able to comment on the quality of the education they receive and allay
concerns regarding competition for training sites and preceptors.
Similar to other health professional degree programs such as medicine and nursing, anesthesiologist assistant (AA)
programs must meet the standards for education set forth by a national accreditation review commission. To earn
accreditation, they must undergo an extensive and ongoing review process to prove compliance with such standards.
Accredited programs provide a professional master’s degree with the commensurate admissions, curriculum, and
graduation requirements. Admission to a master of science in anesthesia program is appropriately challenging. The
admission prerequisite coursework and eligibility criteria (e.g MCAT) are comparable to those of Pre-medicine and other
pre-health professions. At UMKC, the faculty teaching medical student level courses are also teaching the anesthesiologist
assistant courses. The content is of the same rigor, yet appropriately modified to provide the necessary breadth and depth to
academically and clinically prepare graduates for practice in the anesthesia care team.
The proposal of new health professions degree programs or as in this case, licensure of a new profession is often met with
questions and concerns from the members of other health professions, regarding competition for clinical training sites and
preceptors. After years of experience with similar examples, I can report these concerns have never become a reality.
UMKC School of Medicine is the home of the M.S. in Anesthesia and M.M.S. Physician Assistant programs and UMKC
School of Nursing and Health Sciences is the home of the DNP Nurse Anesthesia and other programs. These programs
have successfully coexisted without any problems in securing adequate numbers of training sites and preceptors. The
program faculty have a positive working relationship of mutual respect and collaboration. Both programs are involved in
campus wide efforts to advance inter-professional objectives in education.
In summary, I submit my support for HB 2046, based on the evidence that certified anesthesiologist assistants are
academically and clinically prepared qualified professionals to work in the anesthesia care team. The addition of this
profession to the Kansas healthcare workforce will benefit the health of your community.
Sincerely,
Julie Banderas, PharmD, FCCP, BCPS
Assistant Dean for Graduate Studies and Allied Health
Professor, Department of Internal Medicine
p 816-235-5249 e banderasj@umkc.edu

Medicine Building | 2411 Holmes Street | Kansas City, MO 64108 | p 816-235-1184 | www.med.umkc.edu

