Testimony to the Kansas Health and Human Services Committee
February 9th, 2017
Thank you Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon committee members, I appreciate the opportunity
to come before you today and speak about House Bill 2064. My name is Melissa Fausz and I’m
here today representing Americans for Prosperity-Kansas and our 50,000 volunteer activists from
across the state.
AFP-Kansas opposes HB 2064, as we have opposed all legislation that seeks to expand Medicaid
under the 2010 federal healthcare law. We believe that expanding Medicaid is financially
unsustainable, prioritizes able-bodied, working-age adults over the more vulnerable population
that currently relies on this program, and fails to adequately address the underlying issues with
our healthcare system that have caused a lack of access to affordable, quality healthcare options
for some Kansans.
Every state that made predictions regarding enrollment in Medicaid expansion experienced
enrollment above those projections. In fact, nationwide, enrollment numbers have been twice
what was projected, with some states experiencing enrollment numbers three to four times higher
than anticipated. This, combined with the fact that Medicaid expansion benefits per enrollee have
cost 50% more than was originally estimated by the federal government, has resulted in major
cost overruns that have left many states scrambling to close budget gaps. Oregon, Ohio, and
Arkansas are just a few states who have had to cut other budget items or increase taxes to make
ends meet thanks to Medicaid expansion.
Medicaid costs already constitute a major portion of the Kansas state budget, and are eating up
more and more of the state budget every year, leaving less funding for other government services
necessary to the well-being and quality of life of Kansas families. Consider that, in 2013
Medicaid costs constituted less than one-fifth of the state budget – yet just two years later
Medicaid spending accounted for nearly one out of every four dollars the state spent. Expansion
with HB 2064 would only exacerbate this situation at a time when Kansas can least afford it.
Further, in exchange for this massive increase in government spending, new beneficiaries may
find their new insurance cards worth little more than the plastic they are printed on. Fewer
Kansas healthcare providers than ever are accepting Medicaid. In 2011 approximately seven in
ten Kansas physicians were accepting new patients. Two years later that number had already
dropped to fewer than two out of three – a trend that shows no sign of reversing itself. And even
when patients find a doctor accepting new Medicaid patients, national survey data indicate that
Medicaid beneficiaries will have to wait a few weeks to a few months for an appointment,

depending on the type of care being sought. If it is this difficult for Medicaid recipients to access
care now, it will become increasingly impossible after pouring an additional 100,000 individuals
into the already strained program.
The quality of care recipients receive through the program is also troubling, given the amount
funding the program receives per enrollee. A study from MIT, Harvard, and Dartmouth
researchers found that, for every dollar spent in the Medicaid program, only 20 to 40 cents of
benefit was reaching the enrollee. It may come as no surprise, then, that the two seminal randomassignment studies done on Medicaid beneficiaries found that enrollee health outcomes woefully
underperformed compared to private insurance, and often failed to outperform the health
outcomes of the uninsured.
Kansas can do better than this. By rejecting this costly expansion, we can preserve state funding
for core government functions that will actually improve the lives of everyday Kansans. And we
can do even more by enacting patient-centered reforms to our healthcare system that will allow
market pressures to deflate healthcare costs and improve access to a wide variety of care options
for families across the state.
For these reasons, we respectfully ask that you vote against HB 2064, and hope you will join us
in advocating for true, fiscally responsible healthcare reforms that Kansans will be able to benefit
from for years to come. Thank you.
Melissa Fausz
Senior Policy Analyst
Americans for Prosperity
Americans for Prosperity (AFP) exists to recruit, educate, and mobilize citizens in support of the policies and goals
of a free society at the local, state, and federal level, helping every American live their dream – especially the least
fortunate. AFP has more than 3.2 million activists across the nation, a local infrastructure that includes 36 state
chapters, and has received financial support from more than 100,000 Americans in all 50 states. For more
information, visit www.AmericansForProsperity.org.

