Testimony to House Health and Human Services Committee
HB 2064 – Legislative Medicaid Expansion Authority
9 February 2017
James Franko, Vice President and Policy Dir.,
& Patrick Parkes, Fiscal Policy Analyst
Chairman Hawkins and Members of the Committee;
We appreciate the opportunity to offer testimony on HB 2064, which concerns the expansion of
Medicaid eligibility in Kansas.
Expanding Medicaid would saddle our state with additional fiscal challenges it can ill afford. The
persistent vulnerability of federal matching funds compounds this concern. Expansion would also fail
to provide quality healthcare to many of our fellow Kansans who need it most. It would finance
Medicaid coverage for working-age, childless, able-bodied adults not covered under the state’s current
program at a time when thousands of our most vulnerable Kansans with disabilities can wait years for
services (Smith NPR 2016).
Unproven and Ineffective Healthcare Outcomes
The federal Affordable Care Act (ACA)’s Medicaid expansion framework was designed to reduce overall
healthcare costs by lowering the prevalence of uncompensated care. Such care occurred when
previously uninsured patients sought treatment in expensive emergency rooms. Without a guarantee of
reimbursement for services rendered, hospitals would be forced to make up for financial shortfalls
incurred on this care by charging insured patients higher rates for care across the board.
By first mandating that every individual purchase health insurance and then expanding Medicaid to
provide coverage to individuals who might have difficulty doing so, the collective hope was that
individuals could start receiving non-emergent medical care in less expensive, non-emergent clinics and
doctors’ offices instead of emergency room settings. If an illness did indeed require emergency room
care, hospitals could at least anticipate some basic reimbursement on behalf of patients who may have
previously offered no reimbursement at all.
With this in mind, it is reasonable to ask whether or not the Medicaid expansion via the ACA provides
the best solution for curbing uncompensated care scenarios and costs while also improving overall
health outcomes for patients. January 2014 research published in the journal Science by a team of
researchers at Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the National Bureau
of Economic Research (NBER) studied Medicaid expansion in Oregon and pointed to failure on both
counts.
On the question of higher-cost emergency care, the researchers noted that overall emergency room use
increased by 40% for new Medicaid recipients. Most tellingly, there was an 18% spike in emergency
room visits to treat non-emergency conditions that could have been addressed more cost-effectively in
primary care or other settings (Taubman et al. 265). This marks not only a continuation but also a
growth of one of the key cost trends the ACA and Medicaid expansion were designed to reverse.

Testimony before House Health and Human Services Committee
Page 2 of 3
9 February 2017

On the question of health outcomes, the researchers found no evidence of Medicaid coverage
improving key measures of patient health like blood pressure levels, cholesterol levels, and longer-term
blood sugar maintenance measured via glycated hemoglobin levels (Taubman et al. 263).
On both questions, the research team used pre-ACA, 2007-2009 data—which coincided with the Oregon
Health Insurance Experiment (OHIE) of 2008. The Institutional Review Board (IRB)-approved OHIE was
unique given Oregon’s use of a lottery initially to determine Medicaid enrollment under a newly
expanded eligibility framework. This created groundbreaking, natural control and treatment groups that
enabled the study of real-life healthcare usage rates and outcomes under Medicaid expansion using a
gold-standard, randomized control group research design (Taubman 263). By predating the ACA and
even the Obama Administration itself, the results remain valid and free of bias toward or against either
entity.
Overall, the fact that Medicaid expansion failed to rein in the higher costs of emergency care while
leaving recipients no better off health-wise than their socioeconomic peers without Medicaid begs the
question of why Kansas should spend precious taxpayer dollars in pursuit of subpar results. And this says
nothing of the significant macro-level financial pressures Kansas’ already tight budget will face if
Medicaid expansion is undertaken.
Macro-Level Costs to the State
In 2014, we estimated Medicaid expansion would add $625 million in costs to the state over ten years,
as an estimated 130,000 Kansans became newly eligible for Medicaid (Gokhale 3).
The Kansas Health Institute (KHI) offered its own, more recent estimates in November 2016, predicting
expansion costs to the state over both a seven-year period and a ten-year period beginning in 2018. Its
seven-year estimate was $729.7 million, and its ten-year estimate was $1.1 billion (Kansas Health
Institute 4).
These potential costs loom large in their own right, but they are by no means guaranteed to stop there.
A November 2016 study from the Foundation for Government Accountability found the following
evidence of staggering unpredicted cost overruns in states that have expanded their Medicaid programs
under the Affordable Care Act (ACA):
 Kentucky’s Medicaid expansion efforts promised to save the state money but instead
went an estimated $3.3 billion over budget in just two and a half years, threatening to
absorb funding meant for public schools, public safety, and retiree pensions .
 Ohio’s Medicaid expansion program is already $4.7 billion over budget with the potential
to climb to $8 million over budget by the end of 2017
 Illinois’ program is $2 billion dollars over budget in just two years.
 Colorado and New Mexico face cost overruns of $550 million and $560 million
respectively in just eighteen months (Ingram and Horton 5-7).
The study notes enrollment has sailed beyond predicted levels as well. 24 states with expanded
Medicaid programs and at least a year of data available on them show a collective enrollment overrun of
at least 11.5 million able-bodied adults (110%) (Ingram and Horton 2).
As if cost and enrollment overruns are not enough to bust state budgets, Medicaid expansion states
could bear additional costs if federal matching funds tied to Medicaid expansion are lowered or
discontinued altogether. Yet, this is far from being a new phenomenon spurred by the 2016 election

Testimony before House Health and Human Services Committee
Page 2 of 3
9 February 2017

results. Even President Obama floated the idea of match reductions as early as 2011 (Note: See CBPP
blog post on the Obama Administration’s “blended rate” proposal).
Finally, the Obama Administration’s own final actuarial report on Medicaid admitted to the growing
strain the program is placing on state budgets by saying, “However, even without solvency as a concern,
Medicaid constitutes a significant portion of spending by both Federal and State governments and thus
is important to evaluate as part of the respective budgets. A growing share of budget expenditures on
the Medicaid program could displace spending on other important programs, or additional taxes or
other revenue sources could be required to fund Medicaid” (Office of the Actuary, Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services 45).
Conclusion
We oppose HB 2064 and its Medicaid eligibility expansion provisions due to the concerns related to
healthcare quality and cost outlined above. Some changes are certainly needed as the state continually
looks for the best ways to provide health insurance coverage to Kansans who need it most. However,
Medicaid expansion is fiscally unsustainable and is continually vulnerable to change—if not complete
discontinuance. As such, it is not the answer to providing health coverage that improves outcomes and
lowers costs for all Kansans.
Works Cited
"2016 Actuarial Report on the Financial Outlook for Medicaid." Office of the Actuary, Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services, United States Department of Health & Human Services, 19 Jan. 2017, pp.
1-68, https://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and
Systems/Research/ActuarialStudies/Downloads/MedicaidReport2016.pdf. Accessed 7 Feb. 2017.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh. "Should Kansas Expand Medicaid Under the Affordable Care Act?" KPI Policy Brief
(2013): 1-8.
Ingram, Jonathan, and Nicholas Horton. "ObamaCare Expansion Enrollment is Shattering Projections:
Taxpayers and the Truly Needy Will Pay the Price." The Foundation for Government Accountability, Nov.
2016, pp. 1-15, https://thefga.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/ObamaCare-Enrollment-is-ShatteringProjections.pdf. Accessed 6 Feb. 2017.
Park, Edwin, and Judith Solomon. "Proposal to Establish Federal Medicaid “Blended Rate” Would Shift
Significant Costs to States Would Be Hard to Set Fairly and Accurately; Would Likely Force Cuts to
Children, People With Disabilities." Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, 24 June 2011. Web. 17 Mar.
2015. <http://www.cbpp.org/files/6-24-11health.pdf>.
Parkes, Patrick S. "Kansas Medicaid Expansion by the Numbers: Is It Really a Free Lunch?” Kansas Policy
Institute, KPI Blog. Kansas Policy Institute, 5 May 2014. Web. 17 Mar. 2015.
<http://www.kansaspolicy.org/KPIBlog/117255.aspx>.
"Projected Costs and Enrollment of Medicaid Expansion in Kansas: Updated Numbers." Kansas Health
Institute: Issue Brief, Nov. 2016, pp. 1-3,
www.khi.org/assets/uploads/news/14690/medicaid_estimates_brief_2016_final_web.pdf. Accessed 6
Feb. 2017.
Taubman, Sarah L., Heidi L. Allen, Bill J. Wright, Katherine Baicker, and Amy N. Finkelstein. "Medicaid
Increases Emergency Department Use: Evidence from Oregon's Health Insurance Experiment." Science
343.17 (2014): 263-68.
“To Get Disability Help in Kansas, Thousands Face a 7-Year Wait." Alex Smith, All Things Considered, NPR,
16 Nov. 2016., www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/16/499563857/to-get-disability-help-inkansas-thousands-face-a-7-year-wait. Accessed 6 Feb. 2017.

