TO:

House Health and Human Services Committee

FROM:

Tom Bell, President and CEO, Kansas Hospital Association

DATE:

January 31, 2017

RE:

House Bill 2064 – Support

The Kansas Hospital Association appreciates the opportunity to provide testimony in support of
House Bill 2064, The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas. Kansas needs to be vigilant and take advantage
of the opportunity we have today, while there is still uncertainty about the outcomes of the
ACA. Time is of the essence. We need to expand KanCare before Congress makes changes to
the ACA that could leave our state at a big disadvantage.
The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas is a fiscally responsible Kansas-based solution that will bring
hundreds of millions of our federal tax dollars back home to Kansas – creating jobs, boosting
our economy, protecting hospitals and improving the health of Kansans.
More than 150,000 Kansans need access to affordable health care. They currently earn too
much to qualify for KanCare but too little to be eligible to get financial help to buy private
insurance. These are hard working men and women who are stuck with few options for
affordable health coverage. Without regular care, the uninsured often wait until their health
concerns reach the point of needing emergency care, which comes at a higher cost to all of us.
One way to keep health care accessible in our Kansas communities is to insure more patients.
The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas will provide more low-income individuals with health care
coverage, which in turn helps maintain access to local health care services in Kansas. It also will
reduce the occurrence of uncompensated care for the uninsured and the associated costs that
are passed along to hospitals and other health care providers.
Since 2010, Kansas hospitals have endured federal reimbursement cuts for health care services.
These reductions were supposed to be offset by federal funding for expanding Medicaid, which
has yet to pass in Kansas. According to data released by the Kansas Department of Health and
Environment, the 2016 average benefit for each of the 84 Critical Access Hospitals in Kansas
would be $255,469. For each of the 16 rural, non-CAH hospitals, the average benefit would be

$913,418 per hospital. For each of the 28 urban hospitals, the average benefit would be
$6,255,445 per hospital.
The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas is budget-neutral. It makes health care coverage more
accessible for low-income Kansans at no additional cost to Kansas taxpayers and without using
State General Funds. In fact, with federal funds replacing state funds and a program emphasis
on primary and preventive care to lower health care costs, The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas is
likely to produce a net financial gain for Kansas. Independent sources suggest the financial gain
to Kansas could reach $126.7 million in 2017, with positive net gains every year thereafter
through 2025.

Kansas voters overwhelmingly support expanding KanCare, according to a December 2016
statewide survey commissioned by the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network.
When asked whether they favor or oppose accepting federal funds to increase health
care coverage for Kansans who currently fall in the coverage gap and do not have access to
affordable health coverage, 82 percent of voters said they favor expansion.
Kansas Hospital Association appreciates the opportunity provide testimony in support of The
Bridge to a Healthy Kansas (HB 2064). We strongly urge the committee to take action and
favorably adopt House Bill 2064. We would be happy to stand for any questions.

