Written testimony to the Kansas House of Representatives
Committee on Health and Human Services
Rep. Dan Hawkins, Chairman; Rep. Susan Concannon, Co-Chair
By Jay Rowh, Kansas Silver Haired Legislature president
Good afternoon, Chairman Hawkins, Co-Chair Concannon, and member s of the Committee. My
name is Jay Rowh from Beloit, and I am the Mitchell County representative to the Silver Haired
Legislature (SHL). I also am currently the president of that organization.
The Kansas Silver Haired Legislature was established in 1982 by an act of the Kansas Legislature. It is
our purpose to advocate for the 500,000 plus Senior Citizens in Kansas who are over the age of 60. Each
spring, our eleven regions across the state meet to discuss the issues that are important to the Kansas
Seniors in that area. Those issues are then brought before the Executive Board of the SHL in July, where
they are reduced in number to the six most important to us. Those six issues are then debated in
committee and voted upon by our entire SHL body at our Annual Session in Topeka in the fall. Those
issues that receive favorable passage are what we advocate for to the Kansas Legislature during the
Kansas Legislative session that follows.
This past fall, one of those issues which received favorable passage with the SHL was to encourage
our Kansas Legislature to pass a bill allowing for Medicaid Expansion in Kansas. There are two main
reasons why our organization supported this proposal with over an 86% favorable vote. First, our
hospitals, especially our rural hospitals, desperately need this funding to help them meet the health care
needs of their citizens, and especially of the financially struggling citizens in their area. The hospitals in
our state have currently missed out on over $1.2 billion in Medicaid reimbursement, and that amount
continues to rise daily. That is a frightening statistic for our Senior population who are so dependent on
our hospitals for their medical care needs. Secondly, there are nearly 60,000 Kansans in the coverage
gap, with another 90,000 who would qualify for coverage if Kansas were to expand Medicaid, according
to the non-partisan Kaiser Family Foundation. Of this 150,000 population group, basic math would
indicate that approximately 16,000 of these citizens fall between the ages of 60-65 years old – not old
enough to qualify for Medicare, yet they don’t earn enough to be able to afford health care insurance.
This group falls within the demographics that the Silver Haired Legislature represents. Considerably
over half of these people work a minimum of 24 hours per week – they are referred to as the “working
poor”. Their wages simply do not support the current cost of unsubsidized medical health insurance.
It is the position of the Silver Haired Legislature that Kansas needs to expand Medicaid to help both
of these groups, and all of us in the long run. Our hospitals are wanting the desperately needed income,
and our uninsured citizens, including those between the ages of 60-65, pleading for the health
improving, and even life-saving coverage. Please pass this bill favorably out of this committee, to the
benefit of our fellow Kansas residents.

