7570 W 21st ST N

Bldg. 1026 Suite C 104

Wichita KS 67205
316.721.9005
Fax 316.721.9044
kafp@kafponline.org
www.kafponline.org
President

Lynn Fisher, MD, FAAFP
Plainville

President-Elect

John Feehan, MD, Olathe

Vice President

Jeremy Presley, MD,
Dodge City

Secretary

Sheryl Beard, MD, FAAFP
Wichita

Treasurer

Todd Miller, MD, Wichita

Past-Pres./Board Chair

Diane Steere, MD, Wichita

AAFP Delegates

Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP
Plainville
Gretchen Irwin, MD, MBA,
FAAFP, Wichita

AAFP Alternate Delegates

Doug Gruenbacher, MD,
Quinter
Jen McKenney, MD, FAAFP
Fredonia

Directors

Eric Clarkson, DO, Pratt
Debra Doubek, MD, Manhattan
Chad Johanning, MD, FAAFP,
Lawrence
Drew Miller, MD, Lakin
Tara Neil, MD, Wichita
Justin Overmiller, MD,
Smith Center
Holly Allen Terrell, MD, Wichita
Danelle Perry, MD, Olathe
F. Ron Seglie, MD, FAAFP,
Pittsburg
Margaret Smith, MD,
Kansas City

Foundation President
Jen Brull, MD, FAAFP,
Plainville

Executive Vice President

Carolyn Gaughan, CAE

Testimony: HB 2064 – KanCare Bridge to a Healthy Kansas
House Health and Human Services Committee
February 8, 2017
By: Dr. Lynn Fisher on behalf of KAFP
Chairman Hawkins and members of the Committee:
Thank you for the opportunity to be here today supporting HB 2064, on behalf of the
Kansas Academy of Family Physicians (KAFP). My name is Lynn Fisher and I am the
president of KAFP. Our organization represents over 1,660 active, resident, student
and life members across the state. The mission of KAFP is to promote access to, and
excellence in, health care for all Kansans through education and advocacy for family
physicians and their patients. Quality health care and health outcomes for our patients
guide our public policy work. As family physicians, we see people of all ages, both men
and women, and we work with almost every type of ailment and illness that afflict our
patients.
I practice in Rooks County, which includes practice sites in Plainville, Stockton, and
Palco. In addition to private practice for the past 11 years, I served as the medical
director for a Federally Qualified Health Care Center in Hays for 7 of those years as
well. I see patients in my practice every day who have Blue Cross Blue Shield or other
private insurance coverage, Medicare, KanCare, and who are self-pay.
In family medicine, we strive to achieve the triple aim: better care for patients,
improved outcomes, and lower costs. I see patients without insurance every day.
While those with insurance can get needed immunizations such as a flu or pneumonia
shot, which are known to prevent health problems and death, I routinely see patients
who decline these because they lack health insurance and are unable to afford them.
We have a local community that provides a free flu shot drive, but it is a one-time
opportunity. I often have my nursing staff act like social workers to fill out forms
seeking free vaccines from manufacturers for uninsured patients. We do this because
it is the right thing to do.
I assume that many of you have had age appropriate cancer screenings. For women,
you have had a pap smear to screen for cervical cancer and a mammogram over the
age of 40 to screen for breast cancer. For all of you over 50, I hope you have had a
colonoscopy to screen for colon cancer.

In my clinic we take advantage of programs that provide coverage for free mammograms and
pap smears through Early Detection Works – that is IF funds are available through those
important programs. Without a doubt, these screenings catch cancers in their earliest stages
and save patient lives each year. Should they only be available to people who have insurance
coverage? There are 150,000 mothers and fathers, sons and daughters, brothers and sisters,
friends, and neighbors who could have access to these services if KanCare were expanded, as
outlined in this bill.. Many of them are working – some have 2 or 3 jobs. They fall into the crack
between the current KanCare program, making too much to qualify, and the ACA, not making
enough to qualify.
Without violating anyone’s HIPAA rights, I will tell you about some of my specific patients. I
have one with severe COPD who declined flu and pneumonia vaccines, which are particularly
important for people with impaired respiratory function such as that from COPD (formerly
called emphysema). This person has a job but does not have insurance and cannot afford those
vaccines. I have another patient over the age of 50 who has high blood pressure and anxiety. I
see him every six months, but he can’t afford to do a colon cancer screening or afford the flu or
pneumonia vaccines, which are needed preventive services. These two patients from my
practice come to mind because they decline potentially life-saving care because of cost. They
are, sadly, not the only ones I could describe.
I have never limited the patients I accept based on their insurance or lack thereof, and neither
have any of my practice partners. I have never turned away a patient from my practice because
they have KanCare or have no insurance. But when I see a patient, I confess that I must pay
attention to what kind of insurance he or she has, because I know that it will impact what I can
do at that office visit. This distraction is frustrating. I have to focus on what their insurance will
cover, instead of focusing on what’s best for their health.
The Hippocratic Oath talks about our obligation to all of our fellow human beings. KAFP’s
mission includes promoting access to ALL Kansans, not just those with insurance. Most Kansas
family physicians take this to heart.
As a provider who covers the ER in my critical access hospital, I often see people who seek care
in the ER, basically the most expensive place to receive care, simply because they delayed going
to the clinic due to lack of insurance coverage. Hospitals are faced with providing costly primary
care through the ER. As you know, there are many hospitals in our state that are in dire
financial straits. Coverage of more Kansans through expansion of KanCare would help hospitals
that provide access to health care for many rural Kansans. In addition, there are good

physicians who are burning out due to the increasing complexity of navigating health care,
instead of just focusing on what we have been trained to do: taking care of patients.
HB 2064 provides work referral requirements, subsidizes employer-sponsored insurance to
support employment and would end if the federal commitment falls below 90%. Savings and
new revenues would fund the expansion.
You have the opportunity with this expansion bill to do something good for our state. You
have the opportunity to achieve a Kansas health care triple aim: better health care for
150,000 Kansans, better payment opportunities for Kansas physicians, and better payments
for our state’s health care systems.
For all these reasons we urge you to support HB 2064. Thank you again for this opportunity to
appear on behalf of KAFP. I’m happy to stand for any questions you may have.

