TO:

Chairman Hawkins, House Health and Human Services Committee

FROM:

Michael Mullins, Senior Vice President, Ascension Healthcare
CEO and Kansas Ministry Market Executive

DATE:

February 8, 2017

RE:

Testimony in Support of House Bill 2064

Good afternoon Chairman Hawkins and members of the committee. My name is
Michael Mullins. I am the CEO of Via Christi Health in Wichita, Kansas, a part of
Ascension. Via Christi is the largest healthcare system in our state and serves Kansas
through our 10 owned or co-owned hospitals, physician clinics, and outpatient ancillary
and retail (home based services).
On behalf of Via Christi, I am pleased to provide this testimony in support for House Bill
2064, The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas.
We are confident this legislative approach to expanding KanCare is a fiscally responsible
Kansas-based solution that will bring hundreds of millions of our federal tax dollars back
home to Kansas – creating jobs, boosting our economy, protecting hospitals and
improving the health of Kansans. More importantly, expanding access to health care to
an additional 150,000 Kansans is consistent with our Catholic mission to serve all who
need our medical care, particularly those who are vulnerable and struggling financially.
These are hard-working Kansans who need access to affordable health care. They
currently earn too much to qualify for KanCare, but too little to be eligible to get
financial help to purchase private insurance. This leaves them with few options for
affordable health coverage. Without access to primary healthcare, those without access
to affordable care often wait until their health concerns reach the point of needing
emergency care, which comes at a higher cost to all of us…but mostly means we
continue to provide uncompensated services and care.
The current crisis in the state of Kansas’ mental healthcare system is also creating a
significant financial burden on Via Christi, as well as significant safety issues for both our

staff and patients. With the lack of additional bed capacity at our state psychiatric
hospitals, we have patients sitting in our emergency rooms for multiple days before they
can be transferred to the state hospital in Osawatomie. A high percentage of these
patients are either uninsured or covered by KanCare. There needs to be a much higher
level of attention, discussion and immediate action from both a policy and financial
standpoint in order to adequately address these issues, and we believe expanding
KanCare would provide the additional financial resources needed to address these
challenges plaguing our mental health system.
This state’s decision not to expand KanCare has had a very negative financial impact on
Via Christi. Our organization employs over 8,000 people statewide, with salaries and
wages averaging more than $65,000, and totaling $424 million. However, since 2013,
we have experienced Medicare reimbursement cuts of more than $40 million annually,
Medicaid cuts this year amounting to $ 6.2 million and the amount of charity care we
provide has increased dramatically through the first two quarters of FY 2017 nearing
$125 million. In order to adjust to this challenging healthcare economic environment
we have had to make difficult operational decisions, including reducing our workforce
by 650 jobs since 2013. This has resulted in $52 million annually in lost wages from the
communities we serve, or a cumulative impact of over $150 million in lost state
spending.
I recently relocated from Indiana, where we did find common ground under the
leadership of then Governor Pence, now Vice President Pence, and expanded the
Healthy Indiana Medicaid program. We’ve reached out to our Ascension associates in
Indiana and they tell us the plan is working well, and that the state is in a financial
strong position. As a matter of fact, Indiana has recently applied to the Trump
administration to extend their waiver and funding until January 31, 2021.
If our state expands KanCare and accepts the hundreds of millions of dollars in federal
support, the positive financial impact would substantially offset the reimbursement cuts
Via Christi has absorbed under both Medicare and the 4% cut under KanCare, and would
greatly improve our ability to fulfill our mission to continue to serve Kansans and
become a stronger healthcare delivery system. Failure to expand KanCare will continue
to hurt the Kansas economy. Via Christi and other hospitals and healthcare providers

around this state will continue to have to find ways to remain viable including reducing
our workforces, discontinuing to offering vital services that our communities depend on,
and possibly closing facilities.
For these reasons, I support The Bridge to a Healthy Kansas (HB 2064). Thank you for your

consideration of my comments.

